# Discrete Mathematics

> A math textbook will assume you know the basics of representation theory
> and then a page later write ${\varnothing}$ is the empty set, just in
> case you'd forgotten.

The overarching focus in the following materials is with **proof**.
Question: What is a proof? A **proof** is a method of ascertaining the
truth. One method of proof is a **mathematical proof** &mdash; a logically
valid path from assumptions to conclusions, collectively forming a _sound
argument_. But there are other methods of proof. The **scientific method**
is one method of proof. We begin with a question, form a hypothesis,
conduct experiments confirming or denying that hypothesis, and reach a
conclusion. A **trial** is another method of proof. It begins with a
complaint, then a defense, then an adverserial proceeding before a
fact-finder presenting arguments and evidence, then a verdict by the
fact-finder, then a decision from the court.

Here, we are focused on just one method: mathematical proof. A mathematical
proof is the verification of a proposition by a chain of logical deductions
from a set of axioms. In mathematics, the proof is a showing that something
is true always. Regardess of creed, ethnicity, beliefs, gender, country,
planet, universe, time &mdash; anything that differentiates another &mdash;
a proposition mathematically proven to be true is true. Always. This is an
extremely stringent and rigorous standard. The only field more formal and
stringent than mathematics is logic. The logician is to the mathematician
what the mathematician is to the layperson. If we think mathematics is
abstract, take a look at what the logicians in the philosophy department
are up to. A **proposition** is a statement that is either true or false.
For example, ${2 + 3 = 5.}$ This is a true proposition. Here is another
proposition:

$$
	\forall n \in \N: prime(n^2 + n + 41)
$$

The proposition above reads, "For all ${n}$ in the set of natural numbers,
${n^2 + n + 41}$ is a prime number." The part of the proposition
${prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ is called a **predicate**. A predicate is a
proposition whose truth depends on the value of a variable. In this case,
the truth of the predicate ${prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ depends on the variable
${n.}$

The part of the proposition ${\forall n \in \N}$ is called the **domain of
discourse**. This tells us that the predicate ${prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$
relates only to ${n \in \N.}$ We're not talking about the real numbers,
we're not talking about the integers, we're not talking about the complex
numbers. We're talking about the natural numbers. The symbol ${\forall}$
means "for all" and it is called a **quantifier**. More specifically, it is
called a **universal quantifier**.

To show that ${\forall \in \N: prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ is true, we have to
determine whether the predicate ${prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ is true for any
natural number ${n.}$ In other words, no matter what natural number value
of ${n}$ is, ${prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ is true. We can try some values:

$$
	n = 0 \implies 0^2 + 0 + 41 = 41 \\
	n = 1 \implies 1^2 + 1 + 41 = 43 \\
	n = 2 \implies 2^2 + 2 + 41 = 47 \\
	n = 3 \implies 3^2 + 3 + 41 = 53 \\
	\vdots \\
	n = 20 \implies 20^2 + 20 + 41 = 461 \\
	\vdots \\
	n = 39 \implies 39^2 + 39 + 41 = 1601
$$

This method of verification is called the **method of exhaustion** &mdash;
we exhaust all of the possibilities before we exhaust ourselves.

We could keep going, and it seems as if no matter what natural number we
put in, it's always prime. In a lot of other fields, this check would have
been enough. In physics, if we ran 20 experiments, that would have been
more than enough. In criminal law, a single trial would have been not only
enough, but mandatory (double jeopardy). Mathematics, however, is
**rigorous**. Repeated observation is not enough. As the philosopher David
Hume famously argued, the repeated past observation of a phenomenon in does
not imply that the phenomenon will always occur.

In fact, the proposition above is a good example:

$$
	n = 40 \implies 40^2 + 40 + 41 = 1681 = 41^2
$$

Or, an even more obvious example:

$$
	n = 41 \implies 41^2 + 41 + 41
$$

The proposition ${\forall n \in \N: prime(n^2 + n + 41)}$ is false. Here is
another very famous proposition:

$$
	a^4 + b^4 + c^4 = d^4
$$

has no positive integer solutions.

This proposition is called **Euler's sum of powers conjecture**. The
legendary mathematician Leonard Euler **conjectured** the proposition above
to be true in 1769. It was unsolved for over two hundred years before a
very clever mathematician named Noam Elkies disproved it in 1988. His
solution:

$$
	a = 95,800 \\
	b = 217, 519 \\
	c = 414,560 \\
	d = 422,481
$$

In disproving _Euler's sum of powers conjecture_, the correct proposition
is now:

$$
	\exists a, b, c, d \in \Z^{+} : a^4 + b^4 + c^4 = d^4
$$

Here, we see a new quantifier, ${\exists.}$ This symbol means "there
exists." This is called an **existential quantifier**. Here is another
proposition:

$$
	313(x^3 + y^3) = z^3
$$

has no positive integer solutions.

In formal notation: ${\nexists x, y, z \in \Z^{+} : 313(x^3 + y^3 = z^3).}$
A line crossing out the existential quantifer, ${\nexists,}$ means "there
does not exist." This proposition turns out to be false, but the earliest
counterexample has over a thousand digits. There is simply no way to verify
this by the method of exhaustion; a computer can't do it, let alone
ourselves.

Now we might be asking, why on earth would we ever want to ascertain the
truth for these propositions? It turns out that the last example is
something extremely important. The equation ${313(x^3 + y^3 = z^3)}$ is an
equation for an _elliptic curve_. Knowing the proposition above is true
turns out to be central to factoring extremely large integers. And
factoring is something very important in the real world &mdash; it is how
cryptographic systems are made and broken. GroupMe messages, private
pictures, medical records, trade secrets, classified government
information, they all depend on cryptography. Ascertaining the truth of the
above proposition caused massive shift in how cryptographic systems were
designed &mdash; we went from using hundred digit SSL numbers to thousand
digit SSL numbers in the wake of the conclusion above.

Here is another famous proposition:

> The regions in any map can be colored in 4 colors so that adjacent
> regions have different colors.

This is the famous **four-color theorem**. A mathematician named Francis
Guthrie conjectured the proposition above to be true in 1852. For next
century, mathematicians attempted to solve this problem, all of which were
failed attempts. In 1879, the mathematician Alfred Kempe presented a
**proof-by-picture** that was believed to be correct for over a decade.
Kempe's idea was that all maps fell into certain types, and from that
axiom, he concluded that any map could be colored according to the
proposition. A proof-by-picture is a method of proof wherein the truth of a
proposition is ascertained by pictoral evidence. They are almost always
very, very wrong (but they are, of course, a helpful device for
conjecturing). In 1890, a mathematician named Percy Heawood showed that
Kempe's proof was wrong.

The _four-color theorem_ was proved true by mathematicians Kenneth Appel
and Wolfgang Haken in 1977. However, unlike the previous proofs we've
discussed, Appel and Haken had to use a computer to check thousands of
cases. Mathematicians were skeptical &mdash; how do we know that the
computer did the right thing? What if the computer missed a case? Another
proof was presented in 1997, and yet another proof was presented in 2005,
but these too were done with programming. Mathematicians have accepted the
theorem to be proved, but it is nowhere near as satisfying as a human
proof.

Here is another proposition:

> Every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers.

For example, ${24 = 11 + 13,}$ ${16 = 11 + 5,}$ ${32 = 13 + 19,}$ and so
on. This is proposition is known as **Goldbach's conjecture**, and it is
one of the most famous unsolved problems in all of mathematics. The
proposition was conjectured to be true by German mathematician Christian
Goldbach in a letter he wrote to Leonhard Euler in 1742. To this day, no
one knows if the proposition is true or false.

Here is a simpler proposition:

$$
	\forall n \in \Z: (n \geq 2 \implies n^2 \geq 4)
$$

The symbol ${\implies}$ means "implies." Thus, the proposition above reads,
"For any integer ${n,}$ if ${n \geq 2,}$ then ${n^2 \geq 4.}$" An
**implication** ${p \implies q}$ is true if ${p}$ is false or ${q}$ is
true. Thus, if ${p}$ is true, and ${q}$ is true, then ${p \implies q}$ is
true. If ${p}$ is false and ${q}$ is true, then ${p \implies q}$ is false.
But if ${p}$ is false, then ${p \implies q}$ is true, regardless of whether
${q}$ is true or false. The last point is important to remember: False
implies anything is true. This is strange thing to think about, so let's
try and think about it in terms of an example.

Consider this proposition: "If fish can walk, then dogs are mammals." This
implication is true. Why? Because dogs are mammals regardless of whether
fish can walk. "If fish can walk, then the earth is flat." Again, this
implication is true; "the earth is flat" is false regardless of whether
fish can walk. False implies anything.

Here is another proposition:

$$
	\forall n \in \Z: (n \geq 2 \iff n^2 \geq 4)
$$

The symbol ${\iff}$ means "if and only if." The proposition thus reads,
"For any integer ${n,}$ ${n^2 \geq 2}$ if and only if ${n^2 \geq 4."}$ The
${\implies}$ tells us that there are implications both ways:

1. ${n \geq \implies n^2 \geq 4}$
2. ${n^2 \geq 4 \implies n \geq 2}$

Thus, to verify the original proposition, we must verify the two component
propositions. Here, we see that the original proposition is false if we
suppose ${n = -3.}$

$$
	(-3)^2 \geq 4 = 9 \geq 4 \implies -3 \geq 2
$$

We see that ${p}$ is true, but ${q}$ is false. Because the component
proposition ${n^2 \geq 4 \implies n \geq 2}$ is false, the original
proposition ${n \geq 2 \iff n \geq 4}$ is false. Thus, ${p \iff q}$ is true
only if both ${p}$ and ${q}$ are true, or both ${p}$ and ${q}$ are false.
The crucial point: Whenever we have an _iff_ (if and only if) proposition,
we must always check both ways.

Let's think a bit more about propositions. Propositions come in several
forms. Some propositions are called **axioms**. These are propositions that
we assume are true. Axioms are effectively propositions that are treated as
true without proof. The word axiom comes from the Greek word _axioma_,
meaning "what is thought fitting" or "to think worthy." Essentially,
something we think is worthy enough to be true.

In mathematics, we must make assumptions. Without assumptions, we can never
reason about anything. The difference between mathematics and other fields,
however, is the requirement of being hyper-vigilant and always identifying
what assumptions we've made. There are numerous axioms, or assumptions, in
mathematics:

> If ${a = b}$ and ${b = c,}$ then ${a = c.}$

This is called the **axiom of transitivity**, or the **transitive
property**, and there is no proof for it. But, we've accepted that it's a
pretty good proposition that seems to hold up, so we accept it as true.

Axioms can be contradictory depending on context. In Euclidean geometry, we
have the following axiom:

> Given a line ${\ell}$ and a point ${p}$ not on ${\ell,}$ there is exactly
> one line passing through ${p}$ parallel to ${\ell.}$

Now, in spherical geometry, we have another axiom:

> Given a line ${\ell}$ and a point ${p}$ not on ${\ell,}$ there is no line
> through ${p}$ parallel to ${\ell.}$

In hyperbolic geometry:

> Given a line ${\ell}$ and a point ${p}$ not on ${\ell,}$ there are
> infinitely many lines through ${p}$ parallel to ${\ell.}$

Does this mean the axiom is wrong, or worse, that the entire mathematical
field is wrong? Of course not. The axioms hold up their fields well. The
key point, however, is that the axioms are restricted to their fields. In
other words, the axioms are contained in a particular _domain of
discourse_. But, there are two rules about using axioms:

1. A set of axioms must be _consistent_.
2. A set of axioms must be _complete_.
3. A set of axioms must be _decidable_.

A set of axioms is **consistent** if no proposition can be proved to be
both true and false. A set of axioms is **complete** if it can be used to
prove every proposition is either true or false. A set of axioms is
_decidable_ if it provides an algorithm for deciding the truth or falsity
of any proposition. These rules seem straightforward, but they turn out to
be incredibly difficult to satisfy. Logicians and philosophers like
Bertrand Russell, Alfred Whitehead, and David Hilbert spent signficant
parts of their lives trying to find just one set of axioms that satisfied
these rules. The debates and wars between these thinkers inspired others to
join the struggle.

In the 1930s, a German logician named Kurt Godel proved that no set of
axioms was complete and consistent. Separately, the English mathematician
Alan Turing proved that no set of axioms was decidable (Turing's work in
this area spawned the modern computer).

Godel proved that if we want consistency, there will always be true facts
that we will never be able to prove. This particular proof is just one of
Godel's **incompleteness theorems**. Godel's proof is best left to a course
on logic, but the effect of this proof is profound: Perhaps _Goldbach's
conjecture_ is true, and it is impossible to prove.

**Discrete mathematics** is the mathematics of discrete and finite
mathematical objects. Mathematical objects are abstract concepts &mdash;
concepts like numbers, functions, triangles, matrices, groups, vector
spaces, series, etc. Unlike what we might think of when we hear the word
"object" &mdash; maybe a car, a table, or a molecule &mdash; mathematical
objects are not physical. They do not move; they do not change over time;
and they do not physically interact with real world entities.

We can classify mathematical objects into two categories: (1) discrete
(i.e., finite) and (2) continuous (i.e., infinite). Discrete mathematics is
a branch of mathematics separate from _continuous mathematics_, which
concerns infinite, or continuous, mathematical objects. This difference
might seem vague at the moment, but this is expected. The distinction can
only be clarified with experience in both areas.

All ideas in mathematics, discrete or continuous, are discovered through
**logic**.[^induction] Accordingly, a strong logic background is invaluable
to any serious student of mathematics. As we study logic, we might find
ourselves asking questions about knowledge and truth. Play with those
questions. They are a strong indicator of encountering a link between
philosophy and mathematics. Because these questions are excellent
opportunities for deeper and playful thinking, the text will occassionally
present difficult questions that may or may not have any clear answers.

[^induction]:
    This is the famous _problem of induction_, which has largely been
    accepted as an insoluble problem. The problem has peculiar implications
    &mdash; Bertrand Russell noted that if Hume's problem cannot be solved,
    then there is no intellectual difference between sanity and insanity.
