import { Plot3D } from "@illus/Plot3D";

# Review of Mathematics

<Plot3D
	functions={[
		{
			f: (x, y) => Math.sin((Math.sqrt(x * x + y * y) / 5) * Math.PI),
			domain: [-20, 20],
			range: [-20, 20],
			scale: 70,
		},
	]}
/>

The following pages contain notes from various math courses I've taken, as
well as my own independent readings. I allocate what free time I can find
each day learning something new in mathematics, then recording my findings
here. I've made a separate page, Review of Computation, containing similar
notes for computer science. Given my often hectic schedule, there may be
errors or omissions. I try my best to correct these blunders during my
week's end review, and during a broader cumulative review at month's end.

The notes are organized by volume (indicated by a Roman numeral), then by
chapter (indicated by a Hindu-Arabic numeral). The organization attempts to
mirror a typical course sequence for a mathematics education in the U.S.
The volumes focus on a specific branch of mathematics, and the chapters
focus on topics within that branch. For particularly long topics, an
outline is provided at the beginning of the page.

Unlike many other fields and contrary to popular belief, mathematics
doesn't necessarily require a linear learning path. Of course, some areas
are easier to understand with knowledge from another area. Nevertheless,
the reader is free to jump between the topics if they are interested in
using these materials to self-learn mathematics. However, for the sake of
expediency, the volumes are arranged (and written) with the assumption that
the reader has knowledge from the previous volume. I try my best to make
that assumption explicit by providing links to those areas.

I am so fortunate to have the time and opportunity to read mathematics,
when so many of us go through life without ever getting the chance. I hope
the materials evidence some of the field's beauty, and more importantly,
provide others the opportunity.
