# I/O Streams

In the code examples we've seen thus far, we've used `cout` and `cin` for
user output and input through the console. We can also read and write files
in C++. File and user input/output are all examples of a **stream**—an
object that represents data flowing in and out of a source code program.
With a stream, we can direct data from one program to another, or more
generally, from one source to a different source. Mathematically, a stream
is akin to an _infinite sequence_—a sequence of 1s and 0s that does not end
unless user input or output is explicitly terminated.

Streams are much more abstract than we might think. These are all examples
of streams: Typing on a keyboard and text is written to a file; text is
written to a file and we see it displayed on the monitor; text is outputted
from one file and saved in another; downloading data from a server (e.g.,
_streaming_ a video); a program accessing data from a web API; these are
all streams.

The examples cited are all instances of **I/O streams** (input/output
streams). In programming parlance, the act of obtaining, or getting, data
from a source is called **reading** (i.e., "reading _from_ a file"). This
is the input part of the acronym I/O. The act of sending data to a source
is called **writing**. (i.e., "writing _to_ a file"). This is the output
part of I/O.

There are different kinds of I/O streams, depending on what the sources or
destinations are. For example, streams between files are called **file I/O
streams**. Streams from the keyboard to a program are called **keyboard
streams**. Streams from a program to the monitor (or console), are called
**console streams**.

C++ provides a built-in class for general I/O—`ios`. From `ios`, there are
two classes: `istream` (for input streams) and `ostream` (for output
streams).

For file I/O, we have `ifstream` (input file stream) and `ofstream` (output
file stream). For keyboard streams, we have `cin` and for console streams,
there's `cout`. Yes, the symbols we've been using, `cin` and `cout`, are
actually streams. More specifically, `cin` and `cout` are objects of type
`istream` and `ostream` respectively. Putting this all together:

```
		ios
		├── istream
		│   ├── ifstream
		│   └── cin
		│
		└── ostream
				├── ofstream
				└── cout
```

We've seen how to use `cin` and `cout`, so let's now turn to files.

## File Handling

### Writing to a File.

To begin, this is the directory hierarchy we're working with:

```bash
	.
	└── StreamDemo
			├── main.cpp
			└── output.txt
```

Per usual, `main.cpp` is our main driver. The file `output.txt` is
currently empty. Inside `main.cpp` we write the following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ofstream outfile("output.txt");
	return 0;
}
```

Several things to note: First, we wrote `#include <fstream>`. This tells
C++ to include `fstream`, the class for file streams. The `fstream` class
itself has two child classes, `ifstream` and `ostream`. When we write
`ofstream outfile("output.txt")`, we are creating an instance of `ofstream`
named `outfile`. By creating that instance, we can _write_ data into
`output.txt`.

To write data to `output.txt`, we simply use our familiar `cout`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ofstream outfile("output.txt");
	outfile << "Hello!" << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

Let's compile and execute the program, and `cat` the contents of
`output.txt` (`cat` is a bash command to display the contents of a file):

```bash
make main
./main
cat output.txt

Hello!
```

We can confirm this by opening the `output.txt`: It contains the single
line `Hello!`. Importantly, once we are done using `output.txt`, we _must_
close it:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ofstream outfile("output.txt");
	outfile << "Hello!" << endl;
	outfile.close();
	return 0;
}
```

Why should we close the file? Because without closing the file, the
operating system concludes that a program is still using the file. If we
have that file saved on some drive, the operating system will not allow us
to eject the drive, since a program is still using a file inside the drive
(we've likely seen this when we click the eject button for a software
installer or a thumb drive and the computer won't allow us—there's a file
in there still in use; it follows then that we can fix that by terminating
whatever program is using that file).

A word of caution: If `output.txt` already contains content, using the code
above will replace all of the content in `output.txt` with the content we
write to it. For example, suppose `output.txt` contains the following
content:

```bash
cat output.txt

Hello, world!
```

If we run the same program above and `cat` the contents of `output.txt`:

```bash
make main
./main
cat output.txt

Hello!
```

The original content, `Hello, world!`, is no longer there. It's been
_overwritten_ by the output of executing `main.o`. If we want the output
stream _not_ to perform this default behavior, we can include the **flag**
`ios::app` into `ofstream outfile()`. For example, suppose `output.txt`
contains the string `Hello!`, and we want `main` to simply insert a new
string, `Goodbye!`. To do so, we write:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ofstream outfile("output.txt", ios::app);
	outfile << "Goodbye!" << endl;
	outfile.close();
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
make main
./main
cat output.txt

Hello!
Goodbye!
```

## Reading from a File.

Now let's consider how to _read_ data from a file. The procedure for
setting up a file input stream is the same as setting up a file output
stream; the difference being we use the class `ifstream` instead. Like
`ofstream`, `ifstream` is a child of `fstream`, so we have to include
`fstream`.

We'll rename our file `output.txt` to `input.txt`, and write inside of it
the following:

```bash
cat input.txt

2.99
3.62
1.87
```

Inside `main.cpp`, we have the following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile;
	infile.open("input.txt");
	return 0;
}
```

Notice that things look a little different for `ifstream` than `ofstream`.
Here, we created an object called `infile`, of type `ifstream`. This is an
instance of the `ifstream` class, with the identifier, or name, `infile`.
Then, on the next line, we wrote `infile.open("input.txt")`. This is a call
to a member function of `ifstream`, called `open()`, which performs the
operation of opening the file `input.txt`. Note what this means: The file
`input.txt` must already exist. If it doesn't, then there's nothing for
`open()` to open, and our program risks crashing. Accordingly, it is
always, _always_, best practice to check if the file exists:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile;
	infile.open("foo.txt");
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File does not exist" << endl;
	}
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
File does not exist
```

In the code above, we checked if `infile` had a stream associated with it
(i.e., whether `open()` could in fact open a file). In this case, we tried
opening a file called `foo.txt`, a file that doesn't exist, resulting in
the custom error message displayed. If we instead used `input.txt`, the
file that does exist:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile;
	infile.open("input.txt");
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File does not exist" << endl;
	} else {
		cout << "File successfully opened" << endl;
	}
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
File successfully opened
```

That in mind, we want to make sure that reading is done only if a file
exists:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile;
	infile.open("input.txt");
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	} else {
		// Code to execute if the file can be opened
	}
	return 0;
}
```

With this guard in place, we can proceed to storing the values inside
`input.txt` into variables in our `main` program, and average them:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile;
	infile.open("input.txt");
	double price1, price2, price3;
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		infile >> price1;
		infile >> price2;
		infile >> price3;
	}
	double average = (price1 + price2 + price3) / 3.0;
	cout << average << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
2.82667
```

Very cool. We can shorten our code a bit more, and we should close the file
once we're done:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	ifstream infile("input.txt");
	double price1, price2, price3;
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		infile >> price1 >> price2 >> price3;
		infile.close();
	}
	double average = (price1 + price2 + price3) / 3.0;
	cout << average << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

## Arguments for `fstream`

In the examples above, notice that both `ifstream()` and `ofstream()` took
strings as arguments. Accordingly, we can store file names in variables,
and pass such variables into `ifstream()` or `ofstream()`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <string>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	string readFile = "input.txt";
	ifstream infile(readFile);
	double price1, price2, price3;
	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		infile >> price1 >> price2 >> price3;
		infile.close();
	}
	double average = (price1 + price2 + price3) / 3.0;
	cout << average << endl;
	return 0;
}

```

In older versions of C++, the `fstream` classes could only take traditional
C-style strings as arguments (i.e., `char` arrays). After C++11, however,
this limitation was removed, and we can now use the `string` class.

The ability to store file names in variables is particularly useful. With
this ability, we can ask the user what file to open on the directory, to be
read or written by the program.

## Challenges to Reading Files

There are several challenges and potential bug sources whenever we read
files. The first problem is determining how much data to read, or more
generally, when to stop reading data. There are common techniques for
handling this problem.

## Specifying the Number of Records.

By specifying the number of records, we mean indicating how many data items
should be read in. With this technique, we essentially specify the number
of data items that should be read, say some integer ${n.}$ The program
should read only ${n}$ data items; once ${n}$ is reached, the program
should stop reading.

For example, suppose our `input.txt` file contained the following data:

```bash
2.99
3.62
1.87
3.59
4.22
2.11
3.84
```

These are 7 data items. Let's say we wanted to only store the first 3
pieces of data in a vector:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	vector<double> prices;

	string readFile = "input.txt";
	ifstream infile(readFile);

	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
			double price;
			infile >> price;
			prices.push_back(price);
		}
		infile.close();
	}

	for (int i = 0; i < prices.size(); i++) {
		cout << prices[i] << endl;
	}

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
2.99
3.62
1.87
```

In the code above, we wrote a for-loop that runs for a total of 3
iterations. At each iteration, we read each line into `price` (mutating
`price` at each iteration), and appending that value of `price` to the
vector `prices`. The output works as expected, where only the first three
prices are displayed.

## Sentinel Expression.

With this approach, we specify a particular expression, or value, to
trigger a stop to the reading. For example, continuing with our original
`input.txt`, suppose we wanted our program to stop reading if it encounters
the value `4.22` (the program should not read `4.22` and everything
thereafter):

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	vector<double> prices;

	string readFile = "input.txt";
	ifstream infile(readFile);

	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		while (!infile.eof()) {
			double price;
			infile >> price;
			if (price == 4.22) {
				break;
			} else {
				prices.push_back(price);
			}
		}
		infile.close();
	}

	for (int i = 0; i < prices.size(); i++) {
		cout << prices[i] << endl;
	}

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
2.99
3.62
1.87
3.59
```

In the example above, we used a member function, `.eof()` ("end of file").
This function returns true if the end of the file is reached, otherwise
false. Used in the while-loop, we effectively told C++, continue reading
the lines unless you encounter the value `4.22`. In that case, stop. Of
course, if we wanted to also include `4.22`, we simply move
`infile >> price` into the `else` block.

Needless to say, the sentinel value approach only works if we have some
idea of the data we're working with.

## Detect the End of the File.

The final approach is hinted at by the previous. Here, we simply continue
reading data until we reach the end of the file. To do so, we merely test
for the condition with `.eof()`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	vector<double> prices;

	string readFile = "input.txt";
	ifstream infile(readFile);

	if (!infile.is_open()) {
		cout << "File could not be opened" << endl;
	}
	else {
		while (!infile.eof()) {
			double price;
			infile >> price;
			prices.push_back(price);
		}
		infile.close();
	}

	for (int i = 0; i < prices.size(); i++) {
		cout << prices[i] << endl;
	}

	return 0;
}
```

## Stream State

Using `.eof()` is a good point to discuss **stream states**. Every stream
has a state. Whenever we read files, we can think of the stream as akin to
pumping water from a well. There are several things that might happen when
draw that water: We could be trying to (1) pump water when the well's gone
dry, (2) pump infected water; (3) not have any pipe to the well; or (4)
pumping good, clean water from a filled well. The same idea extends to
stream states.

Every stream has four bits keeping track of the stream's state. The
**eofbit**, represented by `eof()`, is true we're trying to read past the
end of the file. The **badbit**, represented by `bad()`, is true when we
read corrupted data (e.g., trying to store a string into an `int`
variable). The **failbit**, represented by `fail()`, is true when a file is
not open (maybe the file doesn't exist or we simply didn't open it). And
the **goodbit**, represented by `good()`, is true when all of the previous
bits are false.

Knowing these facts, we can use `good()` to cover all of the possible
problems that might occur when we're reading files. This leads to more
concise code (of course, at the cost of not knowing what caused a problem):

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <fstream>
#include <string>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	vector<double> prices;

	string readFile = "input.txt";
	ifstream infile(readFile);

	while (infile.good()) {
		double price;
		infile >> price;
		prices.push_back(price);
	}

	infile.close();

	for (int i = 0; i < prices.size(); i++) {
		cout << prices[i] << endl;
	}

	return 0;
}
```

## Streams at a Lower Level

To reduce complexity, we described streams as being akin to pipes from one
source to the next. This was inaccurate. For a slightly more accurate
description of what's really going on with streams, let's look at things at
a lower level. Consider `cin`, the object for keyboard streams.
