# Pointers

We can think of pointers as a special kind of variable. More formally, a
**pointer** is a variable—a number—that stores an address in RAM. That
address could be the address of a location in memory where specific data is
stored, or it could be an address to some random piece of data. To tighten
this definition, we assume the following: There are two categories of
variables—(1) a **data variable** and (2) an **address variable**. A data
variable stores a particular piece of data. An address variable stores a
particular memory address.

Say we write the following:

```cpp
int x = 1;
```

Suppose, for the sake of example, that `int` takes 2 bytes of memory.
Writing the line above, we instruct the compiler to allocate 2 bytes in
memory for the value `1`, and we are going to call that address `x`. The
effect of doing so is storing the bits comprising `10` in memory. Suppose
the address of that byte is 1000—1001 (addresses 1000 to 1001). We have
stored the bits comprising `1` in the address 1000—1001, and that address
will be referred to as `x` (assume the memory allocated is denoted by the
first address, 1000).

Now, say we want to store the address of behind `x`, not the value assigned
to `x` itself. To do so, we need a pointer:

```cpp
int x = 1;
int *p;
```

Notice the asterisk. This is the syntax for declaring a pointer. Now, to
assign the address behind `x` to `p`, we use the following syntax:

```cpp
int x = 1;
int *p;
p = &x;
```

Notice the ampersand. The address behind `x` is now assigned to the pointer
`p`. To see the difference between `x` and `&x`, consider the following
output:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int x = 1;
	int *p;
	p = &x;

	cout << "x = " << x << endl;
	cout << "&x = " << &x << endl;
	cout << "p = " << p << endl;

	return 0;
	}
```

```bash
x = 1
&x = 0x7ffee689a18c
p = 0x7ffee689a18c
```

Notice the difference. The value assigned to `x` is the data we stored in
memory, `1`. The value assigned to `p`, however, is `0x7ffee3fc118c`, the
address where `1` is stored (i.e., the address we've named `x`). We can
confirm this by comparing `&x`, which reveals the address named `x`, and
`p`, the pointer to the address named `x`.

Question: What about would the output of `&p` and `*p` look like? Well,
let's try it:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int x = 1;
	int *p;
	p = &x;

	cout << "x = " << x << endl;
	cout << "&x = " << &x << endl;
	cout << "p = " << p << endl;

	cout << "*p = " << *p << endl;
	cout << "&p = " << &p << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
x = 1
&x = 0x7ffee97c618c
p = 0x7ffee97c618c
*p = 1
&p = 0x7ffee97c6180
```

It looks like `*p` stores the data stored in `x`. And `&p` looks like it
stores an address. This output logically follows from our definition of a
poiner. The pointer `p` is just another variable. And because it is a
variable, it really is just a name for an address in memory. In this case,
`0x7ffee97c6180`. That address, however, stores an address in memory, the
address behind `x`. So what's going on with `*p`? This is where we have to
distinguish betwen `p` and `*p`. The variable `p` stores an address.
However, writing `*p` is called a **dereference**. In other words, `*p`
tells the compiler to retrieve the value stored in the address stored in
`p`. In sum: When we first use `*p`, we are declaring the pointer. When we
use `*p` in subsequent code, we are _dereferencing_ that pointer.

Following this discussion, there are three checkboxes to tick whenever we
use pointers:

- Declaration
- Initialization
- Dereferencing

An important thing to note about pointers is that they are just integers.
Specifically, they are integers for a specific address that stores an
address. On modern compiles, the pointer must have a type that "agrees" or
"conforms" with the type of the value stored in the address the pointer
stores. For example, if we write `double var = 1.23941,` then a subsequent
pointer `ptr` must have the type `double*`. This is intended more as a
safeguard than anything else. Many features in C++ respond to the dangers
of programming in C. In C, we could very well declare the pointer to have
the type `int*`. The response to doing so in C is a _warning_ rather than
an _error_ (what a modern C++ compiler would return). The problem with
doing so, however, is that it's often the case that an `int` pointer simply
isn't large enough to accomodate a `double` value. The result: Losing parts
of the `double` value.

## Why are there pointers?

Recall that all of our programs primary source code is placed in the
`main()` function. When run our program, the `main()` function's machine
code is loaded in the code section of memory. Now, if we have other
functions in our program that the code in `main()` calls, those functions
are also loaded in the code section.

The `main()` function has access to everything in the code section, and
everything in the stack. However, we know that there is another section in
memory relevant to our program—the heap. `main()`, however, cannot directly
access the heap. But, it can _indirectly_ access the heap with a _pointer_.

Although pointers are most commonly associated with values stored in the
heap, they are not limited to such application. Files outside of our
program are accessed with pointers. Our program's connection to a network
is made with a pointer. Our program's access to printers, keyboards,
monitors, speakers, and other external devices is provided with
pointers.[^pointernote]

[^pointernote]:
    Not every language provides pointers. Most high-level languages like
    Java, Python, JavaScript, and many others, do not provide any means to
    use pointers. In contrast, because languages like C and C++ provide
    pointers, they are often referred to as **systems-programming
    languages**; languages that can be used for constructing system-level
    programs like device drivers and operating systems.

Why restrict direct access to these entities and require pointers? Because
our program isn't the only thing using these entities. We might have other
programs using these shared entities, and we don't want one program to
potentially wreck everything for all the others. This is why entities like
the heap, external devices, and networks require the use of pointers.

## Allocating Memory in the Heap

In the previous example, `int x = 1` assigns `1` to a memory location in
the stack. Accordingly, our pointer `p` pointed to a stack memory address.
How do we allocate things to the heap? Again, we use the pointer syntax:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int x = 1;

	int *p;
	p = new int;
	*p = 1;

	return 0;
}
```

In the code above, `int x = 1` stores `1` in a memory address in the stack
segment. `*p = 1`, however, stores another `1` in a memory address in the
heap segment. To see the differences:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int x = 1;
	int *s;
	s = &x;

	cout << "s = " << s << endl;

	int *p;
	p = new int;
	*p = 1;

	cout << "p = " << p << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
./main
s = 0x7ffee69b418c
p = 0x7ff430c05c00

./main
s = 0x7ffee46f518c
p = 0x7fd160c05c00
```

We cannot know from the address alone whether an address is in the stack or
the heap, but notice that the addresses are different. This tells us that
`s` and `p` store different addresses. Both addresses store `1`, but they
are different addresses.

A word of caution: When we allocate memory in the stack, the data occupying
those addresses are automatically destroyed when they are no longer needed.
This is not the case with the heap. Data stored in the heap will always
stay in the heap as long as our program runs. This means that the heap can
grow very large without our noticing. If the heap grows large enough, it
will at some point collide with the stack, and we are greeted with a **heap
overflow**. We never want heap overflows—the end result is the program
crashing.

Because of this issue, we must always **de-allocate** memory we've
instructed the compiler to allocate. We can think of this as sort
"clearing" the memory we've allocated.[^clearingnote]

For example, suppose we allocated memory in the heap for an array. To
de-allocate, we write the following:

[^clearingnote]:
    This is such an important point that we denote it as a commandment:
    Heap memory _must_ be de-allocated.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int *p = new int[3] { 1, 2, 3 };

	for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++) {
		cout &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; p[i] &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; endl;
	}

	delete []p;
	return 0;
}
```

The second to last line, `delete []p`, is what we use to de-allocate `p`.
Notice that we also used a new piece of syntax,
`int *p = new int[3] { 1, 2, 3 };`, to both declare and initialize the
pointer `p`. The syntax above is equivalent to:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int *p;
	p = new int[3] {1, 2, 3};

	for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
		cout << " " << p[i] << " " << endl;
	}

	delete []p;
	return 0;
}
```

Briefly returning to why pointers are useful, suppose we have a program
that requires the use of an array. Suppose we wrote the following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[10];

	return 0;
}
```

The problem with the code above is that arrays in C++ cannot be mutated.
Thus, the array `arr` cannot later include more than 10 elements. One way
to fix this is by having the user specify the size of the array:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int size;
	cout << "Enter number of elements: ";
	cin >> size;
	int arr[size];
	size_t arrLength = (sizeof arr) / 4;
	cout << "Size of array: " << arrLength << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
Enter number of elements size: 10
Size of array: 10
```

We've now managed to get around hard-coding the size of an array, but we're
still left with the problem: Once the user enters the size of `arr`, we
cannot change its size.

The fix is with a pointer:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int size;
	cout &lt;&lt; "Enter array's size: ";
	cin >> size;
	int *p = new int[size];

	// various code using arr
	// done using arr --> user selects new size

	cout &lt;&lt; "Enter new size: ";
	cin >> size;
	delete []p;
	p = new int[size];
	return 0;
}
```

## Pointer Arithmetic

When we assign an address of an array to a pointer, the address stored in
the pointer is actually the address of the first element in the array. This
raises the question: What happens when we use the increment operator `++`
on a pointer? Let's try it:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[3] {7, 13, 17};
	int *p = arr;
	cout << *p << endl;
	p++;
	cout << *p << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
7
13
```

Notice that we obtained the first element of `arr` when we used `*p`, then
we obtained the second element of `arr`, when we used `*p` after
incrementing `p`. This leads to our first, and most important insight, of
pointer arithmetic. When we add a number to a pointer, we move the pointer
to the next memory address. In this case, we have an array of `int`, so
when we increment by 1, the pointer moves to the next `int` in the array.
Note that this does not mean we move by exactly 1 byte. When we increment a
pointer to an array, how much we move depends on the size of the array's
elements. So, when we incremented above, we moved the pointer by 4 bytes,
since an `int` takes up 4 bytes of memory. We can confirm this with the
following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[3] {7, 13, 17};
	int *p = arr;
	cout << *p << endl;
	cout << p << endl;
	p++;
	cout << *p << endl;
	cout << p << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
7
0x7ffee1ea318c
13
0x7ffee1ea3190
```

In the output above, the `int` 7 is stored at the address `0x7ffee1ea318c`.
The `int` 13, in contrast, is stored at `0x7ffee1ea3190`. These are
hexadecimal numbers. Converting them to decimal, we have: `140732688642444`
and `140732688642448`. These two numbers have a difference of exactly 4.

We aren't limited to incrementing. Pointers can be decremented as well.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[3] {7, 13, 17};
	int *p = arr;
	cout << *p << endl;
	cout << p << endl;
	p++;
	cout << *p << endl;
	cout << p << endl;
	p--;
	cout << *p << endl;
	cout << p << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
7
0x7ffee018518c
13
0x7ffee0185190
7
0x7ffee018518c
```

What happens when we subtract a pointer from another pointer? Consider the
following code:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[3]{7, 13, 17};
	int size = sizeof(arr[0]);

	int *a = arr;
	int *b = &arr[0];
	int *c = &arr[1];
	int *d = &arr[2];
	int diff = d - b;

	cout << "size of int: " << sizeof(int) << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "size of arr[0]: " << size << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "a : " << (long int)a << endl;
	cout << "b : " << (long int)b << endl;
	cout << "c : " << (long int)c << endl;
	cout << "d : " << (long int)d << endl;
	cout << "d - b = " << diff << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
size of int: 4 bytes
size of arr[0]: 4 bytes
a : 140732903379340
b : 140732903379340
c : 140732903379344
d : 140732903379348
d - b = 2
```

Let's carefully consider the code above. First we created a pointed call
`*b` just to confirm that the pointer to an array points to the first
element in the array. In this case, we outputted the address pointed to by
the pointer as a `long int`. Notice that `*a`, which points to the array,
and `*b`, which points to the first element in the array, are the same.

Next, we confirmed that each element in the array are separated by 4 bytes.
We confirm this by showing that `int` has a size of 4 bytes, and the first
element in the array, an `int`, has a size of 4 bytes. Examining the
decimal form of the memory address, they all differ by exactly 4 bytes.

Now the tricky part. When we subtracted the address `d` (the address of the
third element in the array) from the address `b` (the address of the first
element), we got back `2`. Why is it 2? Let's consider some more code:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[3]{7, 13, 17};
	int size = sizeof(arr[0]);
	int sizeInt = sizeof(int);

	int *a = arr;
	int *b = &arr[0];
	int *c = &arr[1];
	int *d = &arr[2];

	int e = (d - b) * sizeInt;
	int f = d - b;
	int g = e / sizeInt;

	cout << "size of int: " << sizeInt << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "size of arr[0]: " << size << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "a : " << (long int)a << endl;
	cout << "b : " << (long int)b << endl;
	cout << "c : " << (long int)c << endl;
	cout << "d : " << (long int)d << endl;
	cout << "Difference in memory:  " << e << endl;
	cout << "Abstraction: " << f << endl;
	cout << "Distance in memory: " << g << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
size of int: 4 bytes
size of arr[0]: 4 bytes
a : 140732783632780
b : 140732783632780
c : 140732783632784
d : 140732783632788
Difference in memory:  8
Abstraction: 2
Distance in memory: 2
```

In the code above, we've changed a few things. First, `e` stores the value
resulting from subtracting `d` and `b`, and multiplying it by the size of
an `int`. This gives us the exact difference between `d`, the address of
the third element, and `b`, the address of the first element—8 bytes.
Indeed, the _actual_ difference between `d` and `b` is 8 bytes. In other
words, `b` is 8 bytes away from `d`. If we divide that by the size of an
`int`, 4 bytes, we get 2. That 2 is the _abstracted_ distance between the
first element and the third element (index at 0 to index at 2). I.e., the
third element is exactly 2 blocks of memory away from the first element.

Thus, in pointer arithmetic, subtracting two pointers ${a}$ and ${b}$ gives
you the _abstracted_ distance between ${a}$ and ${b,}$ not the _exact_
distance, in memory, between the two addresses. To confirm, consider the
following:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;


int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[5]{7, 13, 17, 22, 19};
	int size = sizeof(arr[0]);
	int sizeInt = sizeof(int);

	int *a = arr;
	int *d = &arr[4];

	int e = (d - a) * sizeInt;
	int f = d - a;
	int g = e / sizeInt;

	cout << "size of int: " << sizeInt << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "size of arr[0]: " << size << " bytes" << endl;
	cout << "a : " << (long int)a << endl;
	cout << "d : " << (long int)d << endl;
	cout << "Difference in memory:  " << e << endl;
	cout << "Abstraction: " << f << endl;
	cout << "Distance in memory: " << g << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
size of int: 4 bytes
size of arr[0]: 4 bytes
a : 140732787970432
d : 140732787970448
Difference in memory: 16
Abstraction: 4
Distance in memory: 4
```

Above, we subtracted the address of the first element from the address of
the last element. This is a difference of 16 bytes in memory (confirmed by
the decimal representation of the addresses). However, the actual output
from `d - b`, a pointer subtraction, is 4. Why? Because in C++, the result
of a pointer subtraction is the actual difference, 16, divided by the
number of bytes the datum takes (for an `int`, 4 bytes). This results in 4,
corresponding to index 4 minus index 0.

Why does C++ use this abstraction of dividing the actual difference by the
size of the data type? Because by and large, programmers aren't working
with bytes (with the exception of the data types that take only 1 byte).
Most data types take up more than 1 byte of memory, so C++ made the
decision to return the result of pointer arithmetic in terms of units of
bytes (i.e., blocks of memory). Had C++ decided not to, its users would
have to constantly remember to include the sizes of the relevant types,
leading to more verbose code. And where there is longer, more verbose code,
there is a greater likelihood of bugs.

Note that performing pointer arithmetic allows us to draw several
inferences: Suppose ${p}$ and ${q}$ are pointers to elements in an array.
Suppose ${p}$ points to element ${m,}$ and ${q}$ points to element ${n.}$
If the result of ${q - p}$ is positive, then ${m}$ comes before ${n}$ If
the result of ${q - p}$ is negative, then ${n}$ comes before ${n.}$ If
${q - p}$ is 0, then ${p}$ and ${q}$ are pointing to the same element.
Furthermore, if we divide ${q - p}$ by 2, then we obtain the index of the
element in the middle of the array.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[5]{7, 13, 17, 22, 19};

	int *a = arr;
	int *b = &arr[4];
	int f = b - a;
	int g = a - b;
	int h = (b - a) / 2;

	cout << "b - a = " << f << endl;
	cout << "a - b = " << g << endl;
	cout << "first element: " << arr[0] << endl;
	cout << "middle element: " << arr[h] << endl;
	cout << "last element: " << arr[4] << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
b - a = 4
a - b = -4
first element: 7
middle element: 17
last element: 19
```

The code above confirms our previous analysis. The element `7` comes before
`19`, so the positive result of `b - a` indicates that `b`, the pointer to
the address storing `19`, comes after `a`, the pointer to the address
storing `7`. Computing `a - b` is the mirror image. Further, dividing the
difference by 2 returns the index of the middle element of the array.

What happens if the array has an even number length?

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	int arr[6]{7, 13, 17, 22, 19, 21};

	int *a = arr;
	int *b = &arr[5];
	int g = (b - a) / 2;

	cout << "first element: " << arr[0] << endl;
	cout << "middle element: " << arr[g] << endl;
	cout << "last element: " << arr[5] << endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
first element: 7
middle element: 17
last element: 21
```

We get back `17`. Understandably so. Indexing into an array requires using
a whole number, so the result of dividing 5 by 2—2.5 —is truncated to 2
(it's implicitly cast into an `int`).

## Pointer Dangers

Some dangers always lurk with pointers: (1) uninitialized pointers; (2)
memory leaks; and (3) dangling pointers. These are the three most common
problems with pointers.

An uninitialized pointer occurs when we simply declare a pointer— e.g.,
`int *p;`—and do not assign to it an address. When we do so, the pointer
`p` will point to some address. That address likely contains **garbage
value**—values that may or may not belong to our program. Because we do not
know what that address contains, uninitialized pointers can cause serious
problems.

The fix is to ensure that upon declaring a pointer, there is always an
assignment following thereafter. One way to do this is to momentarily have
the pointer immediately point to an existing variable. Another way is to
dynamically allocate some memory immediately after the pointer's
declaration. E.g.,

```cpp
int *p;
p = new int;
```

The second problem, memory leaks, occurs when we fail to de-allocate
pointers. If we've ever used an application and it suddenly crashes while
we're working, a likely culprit is the memory leak. This happens because
the program may contain hundreds of pointers, some of which may not be
de-allocated after use, or not de-allocated soon enough.

The fix is to ensure that every pointer is de-allocated when no longer in
use:

```cpp
int *p = new int[5];

// some code using p

// de-allocate:
delete []p;
p = nullptr;
```

Note that when de-allocating, we can also write `p = NULL;` or `p = 0;`.
However, because `nullptr` is a special literal in C++, it is best practice
to use `nullptr`. Furthermore, always ensure that the pointer is deleted
_before_ assigning `nullptr`.

The third problem, a dangling pointer, is best explained with an example:

```cpp
void func(int *q) {
	// func is a function that takes an int pointer
	// coding using q
	delete []q;
}
int main() {
	int *p = new int[5];
	/*
		* some code using p
	*/
	func(p); // call to func
}
```

In the code above, the function `func()` takes a pointer as an argument.
Inside `main()`, we have a pointer `p` pointing to some address in the
heap. We then pass `p` as an argument to `func()`. Now, inside `func`, the
parameter `q` is assigned the pointer `p`. This means that `q` and `p` are
pointing to the same address in the heap. When we delete the pointer `q`,
we effectively de-allocate the memory we set aside in the heap. This in
turn means that `p`, inside `main()`, is now pointing to some garbage
address. `p` has now become a _dangling pointer_, tantamount to an
uninitialized pointer.

## References

This discussion on pointers presents an ideal segue to
**references**—aliases to variables. To understanding how this works,
examine the output of the following code:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define println(x) std::cout<< x << std::endl

int main() {
	int a = 5;
	int &b = a;
	println(a);
	println(b);
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
5
5
```

Notice that `a` and `b` output the same value. This is because the `&`
operator is a _referencing_ operator. In other words, by appending an
ampersand to `b` and assigning it the existing variable `a`, `b` has become
an _alias_ of `a`.

This operation relates closely to pointers. The identifier `a` is just a
name for the memory address that stores the bits comprising `10`. When we
write `&b`, we instruct C++: "This identifier, `y`, is another name for the
address identified as `x`." Thus, we can change the value of `a` through
`b` and vice versa:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define println(x) std::cout << x << std::endl;

int main() {
	int a = 5;
	int &b = a;
	println(a);
	println(b);

	b = 6;

	println(a);
	println(b);

	a = 5;

	println(a);
	println(b);
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
5
5
6
6
5
5
```

To understand why C++ provides references, recall the distinction between
pass-by-value and pass-by-reference. Suppose we had a variable `int x = 5`
in `main()`. We want to square `x` with a function. If we tried to do so:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define println(x) std::cout << x << std::endl
#define print(x) std::cout << x

int square(int n) {
	return n = n * n;
}

int main() {
	int x = 5;
	square(x);
	print("x = ");
	println(x);
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
x = 5
```

We get `x = 5` because functions, by default, are pass-by-value. This means
that `square()` receives a copy of `x`, not the original. Accordingly,
whatever `square()` computes, it remains inside the `square()`'s frame in
memory. And as we know, once `square()` finishes executing, it's frame is
popped off the stack.

How can we pass the original value of `x` to `square()`? With a pointer.
So, instead of passing `x` to the function, we'll pass the _address_ of
`x`, and instead of storing the parameter storing that address, we'll have
the parameter be a _pointer_ to that address. That pointer can then be
passed into the function's body, and _dereferenced_:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

#define println(x) std::cout << x << std::endl
#define print(x) std::cout << x

int square(int* n) {
	return *n = (*n) * (*n);
}

int main() {
	int x = 5;

	print("x = ");
	println(x);

	square(&x);

	print("x = ");
	println(x);

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
x = 5
x = 25
```

The value of `x` has changed, as expected. The reference operator, `&`,
makes this whole process much easier and cleaner:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int square(int &n) {
	return n = n * n;
}

int main() {
	int x = 5;
	square(x);
	std::cout << "x = " << x << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
x = 25
```

In the parameter list for `square()`, we wrote `&n`. Thus, when the
function `square()` is executed, what actually happens as a whole is:

```
main()
=================
int x = 5;
square(x);
=================
&darr;
square(int &n)
=================
int &n = x;
return n = n * n;
=================
```

In other words, the parameter `n` has become an alias of `x`, and `x` is
the identifier for the memory address storing `5`. Thus, when we modify
`n`, we also modify `x`.

The moment we've declared a reference, it is bound to its **referee**—the
variable the reference references. For example, observe the output below:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() {
	int x = 5;
	int y = 6;
	std::cout << "x = " << x << std::endl;
	std::cout << "y = " << y << "\n" << std::endl;

	int& ref = x;
	std::cout << "x = " << x << std::endl;
	std::cout << "y = " << y << std::endl;
	std::cout << "ref = " << ref << "\n" << std::endl;


	ref = y;
	std::cout << "x = " << x << std::endl;
	std::cout << "y = " << y << std::endl;
	std::cout << "ref = " << ref << "\n" << std::endl;

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
x = 5
y = 6

x = 5
y = 6
ref = 5

x = 6
y = 6
ref = 6
```
