# Static Variables

Static variables are often a source of confusion for beginning programmers.
In part, this is due to being overloaded with too many details all at once.
Consider this issue, we study static variables by first considering a
relatable problem. Consider the following code:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
	using namespace std;

	int x = 1;

	void func1() {
		x++;
		cout << x << endl;
	}

	int main() {
		func1();
		func1();
		func1();
		return 0;
	}
```

```bash
1
2
3
```

In the code above, we have a global variable, `int x = 1`. We then have a
function, `func1()`, which increments the global variable, `x` by `1`.
Thus, when we go into `main()`, each call to `func1()` results in an
increment of `x`.

Now, suppose we don't want that `x` to be a global variable. There are many
reasons for why might not want `x` to be a global variable (in fact, we
generally do not want global variables). Perhaps `x` is a variable that
should only be mutated by `func1()`; no other function or module should be
able to touch it. How do we achieve this? Well, why not just place `x`
inside the body of `func1()`? Let's try that:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

void func1() {
	int x = 0;
	x++;
	cout << x << endl;
}

int main() {
	func1();
	func1();
	func1();
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
1
1
1
```

Nope, that didn't work. Remember: After a function has finished executing,
the stack where its variables are allocated is popped off. Thus, we never
see `1 2 3` because each function call starts with `int x = 0`. Static
variables are intended to address this problem:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

void func1() {
	static int x = 0;
	x++;
	cout << x << endl;
}

int main() {
	func1();
	func1();
	func1();
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
1
2
3
```

By appending the `static` keyword to `int x = 0`, we've ensured that `x` is
treated as a static variable of the function `func1()`. This effectively
makes `x` a variable akin to being &#8220;global&#8221; to `func1()`. Thus,
for every call to `func1()`, `func1()` uses the current value of `x`.

Like global variables, static variables exist in memory so long as our
program runs. The different: Static variables are only accessible to their
respective modules. In this case, `x` is only accessible to `func1()`;
nowhere else.
