# Data Structures & Algorithms

This volume explores data structures and algorithms, a core topic in
computer science. In our investigation, our primary language of choice for
implementation will be C++. Accordingly, as with the other volumes, the
first few sections focus on syntax, idioms, and how key programming
concepts are represented in the language.

Importantly, the focus of this volume is not on learning C++, but on data
structures and algorithms. As such, a fair amount of pseudocode is used for
clarity. Usually, these pseudocode demonstrations will be implemented in
C++. Occassionally, however, we will deviate and use a language other than
C++ for implementation. For example, with simple and low level data
structures and algorithms, C is often has easier and clearer
implementations. For much more abstract approaches, Python is a better
choice. For functional data structures and algorithms, we use either
Racket, Scala, ML, or JavaScript. For everything else (the vast majority),
we will use C++. Hence the "primary language of choice".

It may seem odd to use a myriad of languages, but the intent is not to make
data structures and algorithms confusing or difficult. Instead, we use
different languages because we want to use the right tool for the job. We
also want to avoid mooring ourselves to a specific language. Data
structures and algorithms appear everywhere in programming &mdash; not just
C++. Moreover, the user can freely ignore the implementations. They are not
the focus. Instead, the reader should hone in on the text, the mathematics,
and the pseudocode demonstrations. That's the cake. The language-specific
implementations are just icing.

## Data Models

To begin, we review some computer science fundamentals, but now with a more
detailed view. The earlier volumes omitted several details, for the sake of
expediency and keeping the exposition as simple as possible. Having
grounded the most basic concepts, we now examine the same fundamentals with
a magnifying glass.

In programming, there are three tools we always use: (1) data models; (2)
data structures; and (3) algorithms. These are the three ongoing themes in
this volume.

In all of the languages we've seen thus far, there are rules as to what we
can and cannot do with particular pieces of data. These are called the
language's **syntax**. A language's syntax stems directly from the
language's **data model** &mdash; a set of rules, or a standard, dictating
how data is organized, how they relate to one another, and how the data
relates to the real-world entities. Every programming language has a data
model, and data models vary across languages.

Every data model answers two questions: (1) What values can a given object
assume in the language? (2) What operations can be performed on a given
object? The data model's answer to the first question embodies the
**static** aspect of the language. It tells us what values a particular
object can have. This static aspect is called the language's **type
system**.

The answer to the second question is embodies the **dynamic** aspect of the
language. It provides the ways in which we can change and create new values
in the language.

## Why C++?

C++ is one of the most popular languages at the moment. As a popular
language, it has a large and active community. And with a large and active
community, there's plenty of source code to examine and libraries to use.

Moreover, C++ is a particularly relevant language. It used in implementing
numerous applications, ranging from operating systems like Windows and Mac
OS X, to database languages like MySQL, to consumer-facing services like
Google, Amazon, PayPal, Facebook, and many more. C++ is built for systems
programming, where high speed and efficiency is prioritized.

Finally, C++ is well-suited to learning both lower-level and high-level
abstractions, ranging from memory management to complex algorithms and data
structures. This partly due to how powerful C++ is &mdash; it's a compiled,
highly-scalable, procedural, and object-oriented language. It is also
partly due to how large its community is. Numerous papers, blog posts, and
other commentaries on algorithms and data structure analysis are done
through a C++ lens. All that said, much of what's covered below can be done
in other languages, so the focus in the following materials is not so much
in learning C++ programming, but rather on the inter-relationships between
_data structures_ and _algorithms_.

## Brief History of C++

The C++ languages traces its origins to another language, C. C is a very
old language, developed in early 1970s by Dennis Ritchie at Bell Labs. C
continues to be used today in embedded systems programming (in very rough
terms, programming for machines like digital watches, washing machines,
stoves, fridges, avionics, hybrid vehicles, HVAC systems, etc.).

In 1979, computer scientist Bjarne Stroustrup invented C++, a programming
language aimed at extending C to handle classes (.e., object-oriented
programming). Of note, C++ is a different language from Objective-C, a
language that extends C to the OOP sphere, but through a different
approach. For example, Objective-C is premised on the message-passing
approach to object instances (i.e., an object does not call a method, it
sends a message), while C++ is premised on the `Simula` approach (objects
_call_ methods).

Therein lies the biggest differences between Objective-C and C++.
Objective-C, created primarily by computer scientists Brad Cox and Tom Love
in the early 1980s, was driven largely by the features of another language,
`Smalltalk`. C++, in contrast, was inspired in part by the features of
`Simula`, yet another language. Both `Smalltalk` and `Simula` took very
different approaches to object-oriented programming.

By 1989, C++ was released to the public by the C++ standards committee (a
committee that continues to this day). Several standards have been released
since the first commercial release: C++98 in 1998, C++03 in 2003, C++11 in
2011, C++14 in 2014, C++17 in 2017, and C++20 in 2020. The most drastic
changes made to the language were C++11, C++14, C++17, and C++20. Modern
C++ is based almost entirely on these standards, and they are the standards
we will apply. We call all the standards before C++11 **classical C++**,
and everything from C++11 onwards **modern C++**. The changes are so
drastic that Bjarne Stroustrup has described modern C++ as effectively an
entirely new language.

## Executing a Program

As mentioned, C++ is a compiled language. Our source code goes into a
`.cpp` file. To run the source code in that `.cpp` file, we must compile
the source code. On compilation, the `.cpp` file is transformed into an
**object file**, with the extension `.o` or `.obj`. If our program requires
multiple `.cpp` files, those files are all compiled separately. This
results in multiple object files, which must all be linked together for the
program to execute. That linking is done by the **linker**. We can think of
the linker as gluing, or stitching all of the separate `.o` files together.

The denouement: an **executable**. Of note, in contrast to Java programs
&mdash; which compile to a `.class` file &mdash; C++ objects and
executables are **platform-dependent**. This means that the files will not
run on an operating system other than the operating system we compiled
in.[^osnote]

[^osnote]:
    Those familiar with C might notice that the object files in C++ have
    the same `.o` extension as the object files in C. This is no
    coincidence. C++ was created with the intent of being
    backwards-compatible with C.

Of note, there is no such thing as a "file" in C++. At the end of the day,
C++ doesn't impose requirements on what files you must include. A file is
purely a vessel for feeding code to the compiler. Unlike languages like
Java, where there are file requirements, the onus is placed on the
programmer to decide what files will be fed to the compiler. This is an
important point to understand, because it implies that files have no
meaning in C++. The extensions `.cpp` and `.h` are purely implemented
conventions. If our file has the extension `.cpp`, then C++, by default,
will treat it as a C++ file. If it's `.h`, a header file, and `.c`, a C
file. We can always override these defaults, or even create our own
extensions. We might save source code to some file with a `.math`
extension, and instruct C++ to treat it as a `C++` file. We bear that
responsibility, not C++.

All the programs that follow are executed via the command line. Suppose we
have a program written in a file called `main.cpp`, containing the
following code:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() {
	std::cout << "Hello, world!" << std::endl;
	return 0
}
```

The `int` is a return type for `main()`. By convention, we include a
`return 0` inside `main()`. All of our program's primary source code
&mdash; i.e., the source code that actually runs our program &mdash; is
included in `main()`. We can think of `main()` as the master conductor for
a massive orchestra. There are numerous different sections, musicians, and
instruments, but there is one thing that keeps them all together and in
sync.

The `#include <iostream>` is an _include statement_. It is more generally
called a **preprocessor**. In other languages like Python, it is referred
to as an _import statement_. In other words, the `#include` is a way of
including source code in files other than the file containing `main()`.
Before C++ executes our program it "copies-and-pastes" the code inside
`<iostream>` into the file containing `main()`. This is the preprocessing
stage.[^preprocessing]

[^preprocessing]:
    Importantly, header files are not compiled or executed separately. They
    are "copied-and-pasted" into the relevant `.cpp` file, and that `.cpp`
    file is compiled.

In the code above, `cout` and `endl` objects come from the `iostream`
_header file_, a library. The `std::` is called a _scope resolution_, and
it tells the compiler that `cout` and `endl` are entities found in the
`iostream` header file. We can shorten the code above with a _namespace_:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namspace std;

int main() {
	cout << "Hello, world!" << endl; return 0
}
```

The `using namespace std` essentially tells the compiler that for all of
the following code, keep in mind that we're using `std`. Thus, when the
compiler encounters `cout` and `endl`, it knows that these are entities
from `std`.

To execute the code above, we open a terminal session in the directory
containing `main.cpp`, and execute the following line to compile:

```bash
make main
```

Running the command above, we should see that there are now two files in
the directory: `a.out` and `main.cpp`. To execute the source code in
`main.cpp`, we run:

```bash
./main Hello, world!
```

For the rest of the source code examples following, we will omit these
shell commands when displaying the output to the console. Note that
whenever we make changes to a source code file, that source code must be
compiled again to see the changes take effect.

All code in a C++ program is written in the curly braces following `main`:

```cpp
int main() {
	// statements
	return 0;
}
```

`main()` is a function, and the brunt of our source code is placed inside
the function `main()` because `main()` is what the operating system calls
when it executes a C++ program. Given this role, `main()` is called our
program's **entry point**. The `int` prefacing `main()` is the function's
**return type**, `main` is the function's **name**, the `()` enclose the
function's **parameters**, and everything inside the curly braces `{}` is
the **function body**. By convention, we will `return 0` to indicate the
program ran successfully. For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	cout << "Hello, world!" << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

```bash
Hello, world!
```

Another example, gathering user input:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() {
	int user_num;
	std::cout << "Enter your favorite integer: ";
	std::cin >> user_num;
	std::cout << "Great choice!";

	return 0;
}
```

```bash
Enter your favorite number: 10 Great choice!
```

Notice the differences between the code above. The symbol `std` is called a
_namespace_. We will explore what a namespace is in later sections. The
symbol `cout` is a method inside the namespace `std`, and it allows us to
output things to the console. Notice the direction of the _arrow-arrows_
(formally called _chevrons_). The symbol `cin` is also a method inside the
namespace `std`, and it allows us to collect user input via the console.
Again note the direction of the arrow-arrows. In this case, we are storing
the user's console input to a variable called `user_num`.

C++ is a compiled language. This separates it from languages like Python,
which are interpreted. In very broad terms, a compiled language is one
whose programs must be first entirely translated into machine code by a
compiler before execution. An interpreted language, however, translates
each statement into machine code and executes, one by one (these days, most
interpreted languages translate source code into an intermediate format,
called _byte code_). Examples of compiled languages include C++, C, `Go`,
`Haskell`, and `Rust`. Examples of interpreted languages include `Python`,
`JavaScript`, `Scheme`, `Ruby`, etc. Some languages fall somewhere in the
middle, like `Java`, which first compiles source code to bytecode before
compiling or interpreting to machine code.

The supposed distinction between interpreted and compiled languages is not
all that meaningful; what is more important is _how_ the particular
language is understood by the computer. The real benefit to languages like
C++ is that it takes us very close to the metal &mdash; we have access to
very low-level computing resources, such as direct control over computer
memory. We could, of course, do the same using C, but it would be too
cumbersome to create and handle large, complex data structures. Moreover,
C++ is a superset of C.

From these facts, all of our C++ source code must be _compiled_ and
_linked_ before it _executes_. The processes of compiling and linking are
collectively called **building** &mdash; our code must first _build_ before
it is _executed_.

We raise this point because the programs in the following sections are all
compiled via the command line. Accordingly, we must always be sure we
perform a **clean build** with our C++ programs. Useful C++ programs tend
to contain many `.cpp` and `.h` files. And when we compile a program, we
are compiling just that program. Most IDEs either build cleanly by default
or provide an option to clean before compiling. This is not the case with
compiling via the terminal, and we must ensure that all of our files are
compiled again before execution. We can do so either listing all of our
relevant files when executing `g++` separated by a space, or using some
other shell command to ensure all the relevant files are included when
executing `g++`.

## Comments.

Comments in C++ take the following form:

```cpp
// This is a single line comment

/*
 * This is
 * a multiline
 * comment
*/
```

## The `includes` Keyword

`includes`. We can utilize code written by other programmers by _including_
a header file. There are two ways to do so:

```cpp
#include <iostream> #include "console.h"
```

By convention, angle brackets are used for code from the C++ standard
library. All other external code, use quotes.

## Console Output

We will be using a console for many of the programs in the following
discussions. The console provides a means of communicating information from
a program to the user of the program. To output information to the console,
we use the keyword `cout`:

```cpp
cout << "Hello, world" << endl;
```

We can think of the `<<` operator as saying, Send `"Hello, world!"` to the
console. Those coming from other languages might ask, isn't the `<<` a
bit-shift operator? In C++, yes, it is also a bit-shift operator. `<<` is
an overloaded operators (and since operators are really just functions, an
overload function). The keyword `endl` ensures that the cursor in the
console is placed on a new line. This allows multiple console outputs to
display on different lines.

Notice further the use of semicolons after each statement. Like `Java` and
C, C++ is a **semicolon-delimited** language, meaning statements are
indicated as complete with semicolons. Of course, not all all languages are
semicolon-delimited, or delimited. `Prolog` is a _full-stop delimited_
language (periods mark the end of statements), and `Python` depends only on
tabbing.

## Compilers v. Interpreters

Some programming languages are **interpreted languages**, others are
**compiled languages**, and yet others are somewhere in the middle, a sort
of hybrid. What is the difference between an interpreted language and a
compiled language?

The most obvious difference is that a compiled language employs a
**compiler**, while an interpreted language employs an **interpreter**.
Both interpreters and compilers are computer programs. The most common task
for these programs is to check for errors. What errors a compiler or
interpreter checks depends on its implementation. Some will only check for
syntax issues. Others go a step further, and check for errors that would
normally only be caught at runtime. Others will raise _warnings_ &mdash; a
potential error.

The second task both programs perform is translating source code into
machine code. That machine code consists of either (a) _constant data_ or
(b) _instructions_. Interpreted and compiled languages are necessarily
non-machine code languages, and as such, the computer has no way of
understanding them. Thus, the particular language's source code must be
translated into machine code before they can be _executed_.

It is the third task that distinguishes compilers from interpreters.
Compilers do not handle execution. They perform the preliminary step of
checking for errors before runtime is used. Interpreters, however, take on
the task of error-checking, translation, and execution all at once.
