import { Sequence } from "@illus/Sequence";

<Metadata
	title={"Array Element Shifting"}
	description={"How to shift array elements."}
	keywords={
		"arrays, static arrays, sequences, left shift, right shift, shift, data structures and algorithms."
	}
/>

# Shifting Array Elements

Friday night at a popular honky tonk, we'll often see patrons squeeze into
the tightest spaces between those seated at the bar, clamoring for the
bartender's eye. If we focused on just one of plastic cards tapping on the
counter, we'd notice that it shifts slightly to the left or right,
depending on where a new customer packs in. The card "shifts." We see the
same phenomenon in _array element shifting_.

Suppose we had the following array:

<Sequence data={[6, 3, 8, 5, 9]} />

The operation of **left-shifting** (defined as `leftShift()`) is done by
shifting all of the array's current elements to the left:

<Sequence data={[3, 8, 5, 9, ""]} />

Notice that in doing so, we lose the element 6. Just like the honky tonk's
bar, there's only so much space in a static array. Because we shift
everything to the left, we lose the element at index ${i = 0.}$
Importantly, this occurs before the left-shift. Unlike the honky tonk's
customers, array elements don't stand their ground and push back—when we
say "begone," it will be gone.

The left-shift's twin is the **right-shift**, which we'll denote as the
function `rightShift()`. Its distinguishing trait: shift the elements to
the right. For example, right-shifting the array:

<Sequence data={[6, 3, 8, 5, 9]} />

results in

<Sequence data={["", 6, 3, 8, 5]} />

Implementing both of these algorithms is fairly straightforward. For
`leftShift()`, we're moving each element from the right to the left. Thus,
we must iterate through the array, moving the element at `array[i+1]` to
the position `array[i]`. We also include an operation for setting the last
element to ${0}$:

```rust
leftShift():
	for (int i = 0; i < length-1; i++):
		array[i] = array[i+1];
	arr[length-1] = 0;
```

For `rightShift()`, we're moving each element from the left to the right.
Again we iterate through the array, but with a few differences: We start
from the last element, and we move the element at `array[i-1]` to the
position `array[i]`. We also include an operation for setting the first
element to ${0}$:

```rust
rightShift():
		for (int i = length - 1; i > 0; i--):
			arr[i] = arr[i - 1];
		arr[0] = 0;
```

Given the implementations above, we can see that both shifting operations
have a time function of roughly ${f(n) = n + 1.}$ Accordingly, both
shifting operations have a time complexity of ${O(n)}$—linear time.
