<Metadata
	title={"Is It Sorted?"}
	description={"How to check if an array is sorted."}
	keywords={
		"sorted, static arrays, arrays, sequences, data structures and algorithms"
	}
/>

# Checking if an Array is Sorted

A necessary condition for the algorithm above is that the array is sorted.
Indeed, the algorithm above is incorrect for unsorted arrays. Hence, the
`insert()` operator requires some other operator to check if the array is
sorted. We will call this operator `isSorted()`.

Suppose we had the following array:

<Sequence
	data={[4, 8, 13, 26, 20, 25, 28, 33, "", ""]}
	width={380}
	height={380}
	containerWidth={65}
/>

We can check if the array is sorted by comparing the element at position
${i}$ to the element at position ${i + 1.}$ Given that array above is
sorted in ascending order, if the condition ${a_i \leq a_{i+1}}$ is true
for _all_ elements in the array, we can conclude that all the elements are
sorted. In this case, the elements are sorted up until ${i = 3,}$ since
${26 \nleq 20.}$

Implementing the `isSorted()` method is a good exercise in being mindful of
the **fencepost problem**. Because we want to check that each element
${a_i \leq a_{i+1},}$ we must be careful with endpoints. In this case, we
want to check all of the elements in the list—the property `length`. But,
we must make sure we do not perform the comparison
${a_{length} \leq a_{length + 1}.}$ This would lead to either (a) an out of
bounds error, or (b) comparing the element at ${a_{length}}$ to a garbage
value. Hence, we must stop at ${i = length-1.}$ The implementation:

```rust
isSorted():
	for (int i = 0; i < size-1; i++):
		if (A[i] >= A[i+1]):
		return false;
	return true;
```

Examining the annotations, assuming the array is sorted, the algorithm has
a time function of roughly ${f(n) = 2n + 1.}$ Thus, this algorithm
(assuming the array is sorted), has a time complexity of ${O(n),}$ which is
linear time. If the array is unsorted, then in the worst case scenario, the
algorithm still has a running time of ${O(n).}$ In the best-case scenario,
however, the algorithm has a running time of ${\Omega(1)}$—the first
element is unsorted.
