import Image from "next/image"
import numberLine from '../images/number_line_arithmetic.svg'

# Properties of Real Numbers

> A Roman walks into a bar, holds up two fingers and says, "I'll have five
> beers."

Numbers have been around for a long time. Early humans used all sorts of
ways to record their enumerations: Scratches on cave walls and bones; knots
on strings; pebbles and shells; notches cut into twigs &mdash; all attempts
to quantify, to make sense of the environment. It's as if the numbers
revealed themselves magically.

But what is it really magic? Or was it purely out of necessity? The
intuitive response is that our ancestors needed to quantify objects.
Perhaps the earliest hunters needed to determine how much game was needed
for the village. Or the chief having to decide a fair tribute. But this
response neglects the fact that our forebears weren't just concerned with
survival. They were also deeply superstitious.

Some of the earliest forms of counting date to religious ceremonies and
mysticism. Many of these ceremonies required ordering participants and
events, hinting at the possibility that the ordinal numbers &mdash; numbers
used to denote position &mdash; came before the cardinal numbers &mdash;
numbers used for quantity.

Indeed, there's a plausible argument there. Some of the earliest forms of
the cardinal numbers were rudimentary and simple, in contrast to their
ordinal counterparts. Cardinal numbers were limited to ${2,}$ and anything
beyond that was a word for &#8220;many&#8221; or &#8220;lots.&#8221;
Moreover, the view that the ordinals preceded the cardinals would be in
line with the recurring phenomenon of dividing the integers into
&#8220;male&#8221; and &#8220;female,&#8221; an idea that would eventually
lead to &#8220;odd&#8221; and &#8220;even.&#8221;

Regardless of whether the ordinal or the cardinal came first, the human
need for numerating grew increasingly complex. And as complexity increased,
so too did our sophistication. Sticks, stones, and bones were too
ephemeral, so we developed number systems to more efficiently analyze our
states of affairs. As far back as 3600 BC, the Ancient Egyptians used a
numbering system where every ${10}$ unique characters could be abstracted,
or symbolized, by a new, unique character. The Egyptian system evidences
one of the earliest forms of a base-10 system, or decimal system. Unlike
the number system we're familiar with, the Ancient Egyptian number system
introduced a new symbol for every ${10}$ symbols. In other words, a symbol
for ${1,}$ then for every ten ${1s}$, a symbol for ${10,}$ then ${100,}$
then ${1,000,}$ then ${10,000,}$ then ${100,000,}$ and so on.

Centuries later, the Greeks concocted their own number system, where a
unique character for ${5}$ was introduced. The ancient Romans followed
suit, utilizing the familiar capital letter numerals now relegated to
formal headings and cryptic date tattoos. The numerals ${I,}$ ${II,}$ and
${III}$ are derived directly from using three fingers to symbolize ${3;}$
the numeral ${V}$ from the angle formed by all five fingers; and ${X}$ from
the joining of two ${V.}$ The numeral ${C}$ represented ${100,}$ and half
of a ${C}$ &mdash; an ${L}$ &mdash; represented ${50.}$ The numeral ${M}$
represented ${1,000.}$ Split it in half and turn it on its side, we obtain
something that looks like ${D,}$ the numeral for ${500.}$

The ancient Mayans too had a sophisticated and flourishing number system,
where dots and tallies were used as numerals. The beauty in the Mayan
system was its strong connection to addition. Numerals logically followed
from arithmetic. In contrast to the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, the
ancient Mayans introduced a new, unique character for every ${20}$ symbols,
an example of a base-20 system, or vigesimal system. Moreover, like the
ancient Egyptians, the Mayans understood the need to represent zero and
assigned it a unique symbol &mdash; well before zero was accepted in
Europe.

Ancient China, whose characters made their way into the Korean peninsula
and the Japanese isles, developed a number system from a mixture of
pictographs and arithmetic. Unlike the Mayans and their connection to
addition, the Chinese number system draws directly from multiplication and
addition. By incorporating two arithmetic operators, the Chinese number
system allowed for a smaller set of numerals, which in turn permitted
efficient enumeration of large quantities.

The numerals we use today are the Hindu-Arabic numerals, derived from Hindu
and Arabic number systems. Developed about ${2,000}$ years ago in India,
the numerals made their way into Europe, via the Spanish peninsula. The
Moors (Spanish Muslims), in their search for trade, brought both the
Hindu-Arabic numerals and Ancient Greek philosophy, preserved by Arabic
scholars. In the 12th century, Leonardo Fibonacci, for whom the Fibonacci
numbers are named, furthered the numerals spread into continental Europe.
By the 15th century, the Roman numerals &mdash; until then the predominant
symbols &mdash; were entirely replaced by the Hindu-Arabic numerals we know
today.

All of this is to say that there is a distinction between a numeral and a
number. The numeral is purely a symbol. We could have just as easily
continued using Roman symbols to do mathematics, just as medieval Europeans
did. Understanding this distinction is crucial for when we study numbers.
The Chinese symbol äº” is different from the Hindu-Arabic symbol ${5}$, but
they both communicate the same idea &mdash; the number five. Often, we'll
find that numerals are inappropriate for a particular analysis because of
the underlying idea they communicate &mdash; a discrete number. In those
situations, we must let go of the numeral abstraction, and think in
different terms, different symbols, and different relationships. To do so
effectively, we study the properties of the real numbers.

## The Numbers

Below are some of the key laws of numbers.

> Associative Law of Addition: ${a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c}$

> Existence of an Additive Identity: ${a + 0 = 0 + a = a}$

> Existence of Additive Inverse: ${a + (-a) = (-a) + a = 0}$

> Commutative Law for Addition: ${a + b = b + a}$

> Associative Law for Multiplication:
> ${a \cdot (b \cdot c) = (a \cdot b) \cdot c}$

> Existence of a Multiplicative Identity:
> ${a \cdot 1 = 1 \cdot a = a; \space 1 \neq 0}$

> Existence of Multiplicative Inverses:
> ${a \cdot a^{-1} = a^{-1} \cdot a = 1; \text{ for } a \neq 0}$

> Commutative Law for Multiplication: ${a \cdot b = b \cdot a}$

> Distributive Law: ${a \cdot (b + c) = a \cdot b + a \cdot c}$

Keeping these laws in mind, let's cover some rudimentary rules and
definitions about numbers. We will often revisit these topics over and over
again, as numbers cannot be avoided in mathematics.

## Integers

The integers are the numbers we use for counting (also called the cardinal
numbers in other contexts), and their negatives. They are denoted with the
special symbol, ${\Z,}$ from the German zehr, meaning &#8220;number&#8221;.

${ \Z = \{ \ldots , \texttt{-}4, \texttt{-}3, \texttt{-}2, \texttt{-}1, 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, \ldots \} }$

Some elementary mathematical texts call the counting numbers the whole
numbers, and go so far as to denote them with the symbol ${\mathbb{W}.}$
This terminology is seldom used in higher level mathematics, so we'll stick
to the more common integers. Nevertheless, the idea of a whole number is
helpful for communicating the notion of an integer, so we'll momentarily
use it.

But what is a whole number? We can think of the whole number as such: If a
number has at least one non-zero digit after its decimal point, then it is
not a &#8220;whole number&#8221; because we cannot count from or to zero
with that number exactly 1 unit at a time on the number line. For example,
${1.1}$ is not a whole number, because no matter how much we try, to get to
zero, we have to subtract ${0.1.}$ This is not 1 unit, so it does not
constitute a whole number. And since it does not constitute a whole number,
it is not an integer.

The whole numbers greater than ${0}$ are called the positive integers. We
can think of these numbers as the numbers we use to count forwards (e.g.,
inserting a certain amount of objects into a space).

$$ \Z^{+} = \{ 1, 2, 3, 4, \ldots \} $$

Notice symbol for the set, a zehr with a superscripted plus sign. And the
whole numbers less than ${0}$ are called the negative integers. Here, we
can think of these numbers as the numbers we use to count backwards (e.g.,
removing a certain number of objects from a space).

$$
\Z^{-} = \{ \ldots , \texttt{-}4, \texttt{-}3, \texttt{-}2, \texttt{-}1
\}
$$

The number ${0}$ is neither negative nor positive. It has a special
duality: It is both a non-positive and non-negative number. The
non-positive integers are negative integers including zero:

$$
\Z_{\leq 0} = \{ \ldots , \texttt{-}4, \texttt{-}3, \texttt{-}2,
\texttt{-}1, 0 \}
$$

and the non-negative integers are the positive integers including zero:

$$\Z_{\geq 0} = \{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, \ldots \} $$

### The Natural Numbers

We define the natural numbers as the positive integers including zero
(i.e., the nonnegative integers). These are what we refer to as the
counting numbers in regular speech. Importantly, mathematicians differ on
whether ${0}$ is a natural number. This is more a matter of convenience
than anything else, but in these materials, we follow the premise that
${0}$ is a natural number. If there is a variation, we will explicitly
state that ${0}$ is not included in the set.

$$\N = \{ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, \ldots \} $$

Some texts define the natural numbers as the positive integers, and instead
refer to the nonnegative integers as the whole numbers. For reasons beyond
the scope of the current discussion, defining the natural numbers as
including zero has benefits for later sections.

With the natural numbers covered, we can begin discussing some laws of
arithmetic. There are many other number sets, but we will explore them as
we encounter a need for their definitions.

## Laws of Arithmetic

The following materials discuss arithmetic, the set of rules and
conventions governing the manipulation of numbers. The word arithmetic is
derived from the Greek arithmetike, meaning &#8220;art of counting,&#8221;
which is itself derived from the Greek arithmos, meaning
&#8220;number.&#8221;

There are four basic arithmetic operators:

| Symbol         | Operation      |
| -------------- | -------------- |
| $a + b$        | Addition       |
| $a - b$        | Subtraction    |
| $a \times b$   | Multiplication |
| $\dfrac{a}{b}$ | Division       |
| $a^b$          | Exponentiation |

Above, we used the letters $a$ and $b$. These are called variables. They
are simply placeholders that we can plug numbers, other variables, or even
other operations with variables into. Variables allow us to generalize, or
abstract, statements. For example, ${2 + 2 = 4}$, and ${3 + 8 = 11}$. We
make an abstraction of this pattern, or idea, by writing something like
${a + b = n.}$ This communicates the idea, &#8220;The number ${n}$ is the
sum of ${a}$ and ${b.}$&#8221;

There are many ways to read an equation, but they all express the same
idea. The human mind, however, is a peculiar thing. Often, reading and
writing the same equation in different ways can lead to drastically
different insights. Consider all the different ways we can read
${a + b = n:}$ The sum of ${a}$ and ${b}$ is ${n.}$ The number ${n}$ is the
sum of ${a}$ and ${b.}$ The numbers ${a}$ and ${b}$ such that the sum is
${n.}$ The number ${b}$ is the difference of ${n}$ and ${a.}$

All of this is to say that addition and subtraction are just fast and
flexible ways to express counting forwards and backwards. For example, the
expression ${4 + 8}$ is just another way of saying &#8220;Count ${8}$
positions from ${4}$.&#8221; This leads to: ${5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.}$
This in turn is just another way of saying &#8220;Count ${12}$ positions
from ${0}$&#8221; or &#8220;Count ${1}$ position from ${11.}$&#8221; Notice
that with these addition (and subtraction), we are just offsetting from one
or the other of the operands. ${1 + 1}$ is simply &#8220;1 offset 1,&#8221;
which is ${2.}$

All of this evidences that addition and subtraction are abstractions of
counting. Abstractions are useful because they allow us greater flexibility
and accuracy with our statements. Suppose we want to say, "I'm looking for
two numbers that add to 10." We can write: $a + b = 10$. This flexibility
and accuracy is a powerful tool in mathematics, because it gives us plenty
of room to write statements that say what we can and cannot do &mdash;
rules.

Understanding the basic rules of arithmetic at a very high level is
priceless in mathematics. Part of the elegance and power of mathematics is
that we can arrive at beautiful, and often shocking, results from a set of
very basic rules.

## Addition
Addition can be thought of as moving to the right along the real number line
by whatever number we are adding. So, for example, the expression ${4 + 2}$
can be thought of as "Start at 4, and move 2 to the right." This give us the
final destination of 6. Subtraction is really just addition, only instead of
moving towards the right, we move towards the left. For example, $4 - 3$ is
really $4 + (-3)$, returning 1. Visually:

<figure>
	<Image src={numberLine}/>
</figure>



