

export const description =
	"Answers: What is a lemma? What is a conjecture? What is postulate? What is an axiom?";

export const title = "Mathese";

# Speaking Mathematically

Math Wikipedia articles are written in a language only decipherable by
people who don't need to read the article in the first place.

If we traced a mathematical field's development far enough down history, we
would find its roots in human responses to external stimuli: Geometry and
trigonometry grew out of land surveying and astronomy; algebra out of
accounting; calculus out of describing the physical world. For some,
development was driven by pressing problems. For others, pure curiosity.
Regardless of motivation, we harnessed the ability to draw inferences from
existing inferences. And it is precisely this ability that creates and
enriches more complex mathematical fields &mdash; abstract algebra, number
theory, algebraic geometry, topology, the list only grows.

But why mathematics? A realist would say we do not know. However, to the
poetic mathematician, it is arguably because mathematics is the most human
response to solving problems.

When we first encounter a problem, our first reaction is usually to
describe it. For example, the Mesapotamians likely noticed that counting in
their number system was difficult for large quantities of things. They may
have then described the problem: Some numbers were so large that to express
them required signaling the absence of a digit. The solution? Use a symbol
to represent that absence (we now know this symbol as the number 0). Over
time, as we studied the phenomenon of counting, and what 0 means and
implies, we began noticing relationships to other ideas:

- ${x + 0 = x}$
- ${0 \cdot x = 0}$
- ${x/0 \implies \text{undefined}}$

With enough relationships, we can create a mathematical model. To do so, we
first start with definitions &mdash; statements explicitly assigning
meanings to words or symbols. From those definitions, we produce axioms
&mdash; statements that we presume true without proof (axioms are also
referred to as postulates). In a sense, axioms are the basic assumptions
from which we can draw conclusions, the very inferences that form
relationships.

These conclusions are drawn through the the powerful tools of logical
deduction. The conclusions are formally called theorems &mdash; statements
that we know to be true from the axioms and definitions we started with.

It is at the theorem juncture that we have the great divide of
mathematicians. One camp stops at the juncture, and its members return to
the very start of the process to find more theorems elsewhere. These
explorers are generally referred to as pure mathematicians. Another camp
takes an additional step &mdash; applying the theorems to nature. They take
the theorems, and use it in their analysis of data, information from
reality. These adventurers are generally referred to as applied
mathematicians.

While being a member of either camp is often fertile ground for jest
("applied mathematics is soft, pure mathematics is reality-detached"),
restricting ourselves strictly to one or the other is naive. And in fact,
most professional mathematicians will wade into the discoveries of the
other camp, even if only in brief. The pure mathematician neglecting
application may very well fail to see how her results conflict with the
findings from the other camp; an observation that more often than not
reveals errors in axioms and definitions, the very foundations of her
theorems. The applied mathematician neglecting the work of pure
mathematicians will end up misapplying theorems, or worse, attempting to
prove theorems that have already been proven. In their toils, both waste
the most valuable resource of all &mdash; human time.

For this reason, the materials that follow explore both purity and
application. We will always begin with grounding axioms and definitions,
occassionally with an observation from nature for context. We then work our
way up to theorems, and end with applications. Following this procedure, we
begin by defining mathematical language. More specifically, we will begin
with an area more "reality-detached" than pure mathematics itself &mdash;
the field of philosophy called logic.

# Definitions in Mathematics

Philosophy has demonstrated time and time again that language grounds
knowledge. And to comprehend language, we must know the meanings of the
words we use &mdash; definitions. There is, however, a dilemma. When we
define words, we use other words, and in many instances, we find that our
definitions are circular. "Dead" means lifeless, "lifeless" means deprived
of life, and "life" means the quality separating an organism from dead
bodies. Mathematics suffers the same problem: a "point" is the common part
of two intersecting lines, a "line" is the figure traced by apoint moving
along the shortest path between two points.

The solution: Take a smaller number of words and declare them undefined.
This way, we have words that we can use to build definitions, without ever
running into the problem of circularity. This medicament is unusual, and it
often mildly sickens emigres at first dose. It is, however, what separates
philosophy and mathematics from many other fields. Fortunately, time will
accustom ourselves to it. As we proceed, whenever we encounter a word taken
as undefined, we will explicitly state that it is undefined.

Whenever we construct definitions in mathematics, we must ensure that they
meet the following criteria:

1. the definition describes something we have in mind;

2. the definition includes all of the cases we have in mind;

3. the definition excludes all other cases;

4. the definition is meaningful; and

5. the definition is consistent.

For example, we could define a square as "a shape that exists in space."
This definition fails the first criterion. It merely tells us that there is
such a shape, but it gives us no indication of what that shape is. It does
not describe what we have in mind.

We could define a rectangle as "a four-sided polygon whose vertex angles
are right angles, and whose sides are equal." This definition would fail
the second criterion, because it excludes non-square rectangles &mdash; it
does not include{" "} all of the cases we have in mind.

We may define a square as "a four-sided polygon with equal sides." This
definition would fail the third criterion, because it would include
rectangles and rhombuses, which are cases we did not have in mind. It does
not exclude all other cases.

We could easily define a square as "a line line line line point point point
point." This definition, however, fails the fourth criterion. It is not
meaningful.

Similarly, we could easily define a square as "a four-sided polygon with
five equal sides." This definition fails the fifth criterion. It is not
consistent.

A better definition would be define a square as "a four-sided polygon is a
square if, and only if, its sides are all equal and its vertex angles are
all right angles. The italicized words are logical operators, restricting
what constitutes a square to two conditions: (1) "sides are all equal," and
(2) "vertex angles all right angles." The "if" tells us that any case
satisfying the two conditions is a square, and the "only if" tells us that
any case failing any one of those two conditions, is not a square. This
definition effectively meets all of the criteria: it is descriptive, it
includes all of the cases we have in mind and excludes all others, it is
meaninful, and it is consistent.

## Propositions in Mathematics

Once we have defined words, we can begin to form sentences with those
words. If we think about the sentences we use daily, we might observe that
there are two kinds, or classes, of sentences: sentences that can be said
to be true or false, and sentences that can not. For example, the sentences
"Koror is the capital of Palau," and "Dogs are mammals," are sentences that
can be given the value true or false, and in fact, it is true. However, the
sentence "The weather is nice today," is not a sentence that can be given
the value true or false &mdash; a hot summer's day is heaven to those of us
who surf, but it may very well be hell to our friends nursing hangovers.

Sentences that can ascribed the value true or false are called
propositions. For example, the following statements are propositions in
mathematics:

- "The sum of the measures of the interior angles of any plane square is
  equal to 360 degrees." (True).
- ${12 + 5 = 11}$. (False).

The following sentences are not propositions:

- "Mathematics tastes sweet." (Nonsensical, formally).
- "A triangle consists of three lines and three points." (Vague).
- "It is sunny outside." (Requires us to qualify place).
- ${x + 5 = 0}$. (Truth cannot cannot be determined until $x$ is given a
  value).

We state explicitly here that we've encountered some undefined terms, and
they will remain undefined: sentences, true and false. From these undefined
terms, we state our first axioms:

- There exists a class $C$ of sentences.

- A sentence is a member of $C$ if, and only if, it can be assigned the
  words true or false.

- The members of $C$ are called propositions.

- Propositions can be assigned one, and only one, of the words true or
  false.

We will study what "class" and "members" are shortly.

## Notation of Propositions

A common practice in mathematics, and many other fields, is to use
notation. This is done as a matter of both efficiency and generalization.
Accordingly, we represent propositions in mathematics with small letters,
the most commonly used being $p$, $q$, $r$, $s$, and $t$.

We will also represent the values true and false with the capital letters T
for true, and F for false. Both T and F are referred to as truth values.
Thus, when we analyze a proposition $p$, we can say "$p$ has a truth value
of T," or "$p$ has a truth value of F."

In some situations, we will also use the symbol verum for the truth value
true: ${\top.}$ And the symbol falsum for the truth value false: ${\bot.}$

## Axioms in Mathematics

A chief task in mathematics &mdash; one might say _the_ task of mathematics
&mdash; is determining the truth values of propositions. This is done by
(1) gathering the propositions whose truth values we have determined, then
(2) using logic to derive, or evaluate, the truth values of other
propositions.

However, this feat can only be accomplished if we have some propositions to
begin with. Moreover, those propositions, the initial propositions, must be
true. The trouble is, we cannot evaluate the truth value of these initial
propositions because they are the propositions that ignite the whole
process. The solution: Assume the initial propositions to be true.
Accordingly, let's make this clear with a definition.

> Definition. An axiom is an initial proposition assumed to be true.

## Sets

The idea that all propositions are statements but not all statements are
propositions evidences a key idea in mathematics: The concept of a set. We
can think of a set as akin to a box. The box is the set, and everything we
place inside that box is a member, or element, of that box. For example, if
we placed a bunch of Valentine's Day cards in a red box, all the cards are
members of the red box. If we placed the red box in a white box, all the
cards are members of the red box and the white box. If, after sending the
box to a loved one, our friend tells us they placed a funeral card in the
white box, should we be worried? Certainly! The fact that the card was
placed in the white box doesn't tell us whether the card is in the white
box or in the red box. The card could be a member of the red box, or it
could be a member of the white box but not the red box.

This same idea extends to propositions. If some communication ${p}$ is a
proposition, then ${p}$ is also a statement. But the fact that some
communication ${q}$ is a statement does not tell us whether it's a
proposition. It could be a proposition, or it might not be.

The notion of a set is primitive. It has no definition. The best we can do
is describe it, as we did above: It's a collection of &#8220;things.&#8221;
Those things could be cards, numbers, people, propositions, expressions,
points, triangles, laws, theorems, and even other collections.

Some sets have no members in them. For example, the set of all persons born
in 1700 and still alive is empty (at least to our knowledge). The set of
all squirrels that live underwater is also empty (barring those fastened
with high-tech equipment). We denote these sets with the symbol
${\emptyset,}$ we call this set the empty set (also called the null set or
the void set).

Some sets only have one element. For example, the set ${\{ 1 \}}$ is a set
with only one element. Note that the expression ${\{ 1 \}}$ is different
from the expression ${1.}$ When we write ${1,}$ we are referring to the
number ${1.}$ When we write ${\{ 1 \},}$ we are referring to a
&#8220;box&#8221; &mdash; a set &mdash; that contains the number ${1.}$
This may not seem like much of a difference, but we will see that it has
enormous implications. To hint at why this distinction is important: When
we order an item off of Amazon, the item comes in a box. If the box is lost
in the mail, we aren't necessarily upset about the box. We're upset about
losing the item inside the box. The box containing the item and the item
itself are two very different things!