import {CircularList} from "@illus/CircularList";
import {LinkedList} from "@illus/LinkedList";

# Circular Linked Lists

Having examined loop checks, we now turn to _circular linked lists_.
Circular linked lists implement the abstract data type of a **circular
list**. Most notably, the data structure has the defining characterstic of
its foot pointing to its head. This in turn implies that the circular
linked list contains no null pointers (i.e., all the nodes in the linked
list have nonnull next pointers). For example, consider the linked list:

<CircularList data={[8, 2, 9, 6, 3, 7]} />

In the linked list above, the foot node, colored red, points to the head
node, colored green. Because circular linked lists are connected in a loop,
there is no "first node." To ensure we have some starting point for our
algorithms, we generally maintain a `head` pointer to some node in the
list. In the linked list above, we've opted for ${(n \mid 8)}$ as the head.

Question: Why do we need circular lists? In other words, what are the use
cases for a circular list? It turns out there are several:

- Keeping track of whose turn it is in a particular process. For example,
  in a game of poker—or more generally, any game with multiple
  players—there's usually a set order for players to act. Circular lists
  allow us to ensure the order of actions remains correct.

- Circular lists allow us to implement round **round robin algorithms**.
  These are algorithms that allocate time or other resources alternately
  between actors. For example, in a timesharing environment, the operating
  system allocates slices of CPU time between present users in a specified
  order.

- Circular lists can be used to implement repetitive procedures on a finite
  set of objects. For example, an audio player's feature of repeating a
  particular playlist.

All of the algorithms we've discussed so far can be applied to circular
linked lists, with a few modifications. Before we examine these
modifications, we must delve a little deeper into the properties of
circular linked lists.

First, a circular linked list with only one node has the following
property: The lone node points to itself. This is where we encounter a
problem. If the circular linked list contains no nodes, then the pointer
`head` is NULL. And if the `head` pointer is NULL, how do we determine if a
particular linked list is circular? The answer is, we cannot. There's no
way to prove that a particular linked list is circular if the list is
empty. Accordingly, we adopt the following axiom with respect to circular
linked lists:

> An empty list is a circular linked list.

Because of the axiom above, a circular linked list is has a special
necessary condition: It does not contain null pointers. Because of this
condition, a variety of linked lists qualify as circular linked lists. For
example, consider this linked list:

<CircularList name={"h"} data={[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]} />

In the circular list above, there are in fact only four nodes. The node `h`
is a pointer to the "first node" in the list, in this case, the node
${(n \mid 6).}$ From this observation, we have two ways to implement
circular linked lists:

1. Designate a node in the list as the head, and have the foot point to
   that node, or

2. create a node called head, that is not itself a node in the list, and
   have the foot point to the head's pointee.

The more common approach is the option (1) above. Either or, there's not
much of a difference, other than the additional memory needed to allocate a
new node `head` in option (2).

## Traversing a Circular List

Consider the following linked list:

<LinkedList data={["head", 1, 4, 5, 2]} />

As we saw previously, we can iterate on this linked list because the foot's
next pointer is NULL. This property of linear linked lists provides a guard
clause for stopping a loop. But with the circular linked list, we have no
such pointer:

<CircularList data={[1, 4, 5, 2]} width={200} />

The question then is, how do we stop a loop on a circular linked list? The
answer: We rely on the `h` pointer, and a second pointer, `p`, for
iterating over the list. First, both `h` and `p` point to the same node:

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "h p" }, 4, 5, 2]}
	width={200}
/>

Then, we begin iterating. The pointer `p` will move, while the pointer `h`
remains as is; `p` continues so long as it does not point to `h`'s pointee.
The first iteration:

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "h" }, { val: 4, ant: "p" }, 5, 2]}
	width={200}
/>

Then the second:

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "h" }, 4, { val: 5, ant: "p" }, 2]}
	width={200}
/>

Then the third:

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "h" }, 4, 5, { val: 2, ant: "p" }]}
	width={200}
/>

And on the fourth, we're back at `h`'s pointee:

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "h p" }, 4, 5, 2]}
	width={200}
/>

Based on this analysis, we can implement the procedure as follows:

```rust
fn print(Node* list) -> void:
	do:
		print(p->data);
		p = p->next;
		while (p != head);
```

Notice how we're using a do-while-loop. This is because the test condition
is `p != head`. If we used the standard while-loop, the test condition
would be false to start with, so we'd never commence the iteration. By
using a do-while-loop, we execute the block at least once, which moves the
pointer `p` forward. This starts the iteration.

### Recursive Implementation.

Alternatively, we can print the circular linked list with a recursive
approach. In pseudocode:

```rust
fn display(Node *p) -> void:
	static int flag = 0;
	if (p != head OR flag == 0):
		flag = 1;
		print(p->data);
		display(p->next);
	flag = 0;
```

Let's go over how this procedure works. First, like the iterative approach,
the pointer `p` points to `head`'s pointee. Each time the recursive
`display()` calls itself, `p`'s next pointee is passed as an argument. As
the calls are made, `p` moves along the circular linked list, printing its
pointee's data field value. At some point, `p` will reach `head`'s pointee
again. In that scenario, we must provide `display()` a way to determine if
it's at `head`'s pointee a second time.

This is done by using the variable `flag`. Initially, `flag` is set to `0`.
However, inside the if-block, `flag` is set to `1`. On the first call,
`flag = 0`, so the if-block's guard clause, an or-condition, is satisfied.
This executes the if-block.

Inside the if-block, `flag` is set to `1`, and `p`'s pointee's data is
printed. Then, we make the second call, a recursive call. In this second
call, `flag = 1`, but `p != head`. As such, the if-block's guard clause is
again satisfied, and we proceed, making the third call.

This process continues until we've made it back to `head`'s pointee. At
this point, `p == head`, and `flag == 1`. This violates the if-block's
guard clause, so we stop. The function call has finished.

In the implementation above, noticed that we declared `flag` has a _static
variable_. With each recursive call, a new instance of `flag` and the
pointer `p` is created in the stack. Thus, for each recursive call, `flag`
is set to `0`. This is not what we want—if `flag` is `0` for each recursive
call, we never reach the case where the if-block's guard clause is
violated. To remedy this, we must have an instance of `flag` that all
subsequent calls use. This is ensured by declaring `flag` as a static
variable. And because `flag` is a static variable, we must set it `0` once
we've finished calling `display()` as a whole.

## Circular List Insertion

Now that we know how to iterate over a circular linked list, we consider
circular list insertion. Consider the following circular linked list:

<CircularList data={[1, 4, 3, 5, 2]} />

Suppose each node in the linked list, and each space between the nodes, has
an index:

<CircularList data={[1, 4, 3, 5, 2]} isIndexed={true} indexLinks={true} />

Recall that with linear linked lists, we had two cases: Inserting before
the first node, or inserting at any other given position. Similarly for
circular linked lists, we have two cases:

1. Inserting before `head`, or
2. inserting before any other given position.

Let's consider the second case, inserting before a position other than the
head.

### Inserting Into any Given Position

Say we wanted to insert at the index ${4}$ the node ${(n \mid 8),}$ called
`t`.

<CircularList data={[1, 4, 3, 5, 2]} isIndexed={true} indexLinks={true} />

To insert at ${4,}$ we need a pointer to the node just before it,
${(n \mid 5).}$ Thus, we start with a pointer at `head`,

<CircularList
	data={[{ val: 1, ant: "p" }, 4, 3, 5, 2]}
	isIndexed={true}
	indexLinks={true}
/>

then move it three times to ${(n \mid 5):}$

<CircularList data={[1, 4, 3, { val: 5, ant: "p" }, 2]} />

Once we have the pointer `p` in place, we can have `t`'s next pointer point
to `p`'s next pointee.

<CircularList
	data={[1, 4, 3, { val: 5, ant: "p" }, { val: 2, ant: "t" }]}
/>

Then, we have `p`'s current pointee point to `t`:

In pseudocode:

```rust
	fn insert(Node* head, int d, int position) -> void:
		Node* p = head;
		for (int i = 0; i < position - 1; i++):
			p = p->next;
		Node* t = new Node(d);
		t->next = p->next;
		p->next = t;
```

The time complexity of inserting into any given position depends on two
cases. First, inserting into the position immediately after the head is the
best case scenario. In this case, the for-loop never executes, and we
simply perform the remaining basic operations. As such, the time complexity
in the best case scenario is ${O(1).}$

Second, inserting after the last node is the worst case scenario. In that
situation, we must iterate over ${n - 1}$ nodes for `p` to reach the node
immediately before `head` (the "last node"). Hence, inserting after the
last node has a time complexity of ${O(n).}$

### Prepending a Circular List

Say we had the following circular linked list:

<CircularList name={"h"} data={[1, 4, 3, 5, 2]} />

Suppose we wanted to insert just before head. To do so, we create a new
node `t` with some data, and have it point to `h`'s pointee:

<CircularList name={"h"} data={[{ val: 1, ant: "t" }, 4, 3, 5, 2]} />

Once `t` is linked, we must have the foot point to `t`:

<CircularList name={"h"} data={["t", { val: 1, ant: "t" }, 4, 3, 5, 2]} />

Because of this step, we must manipulate the foot. Accordingly, we need a
third pointer, `p`, to iterate over the list until `p->next == head`. Once
that condition is reached, we have a pointer `p` pointing to the foot:

<CircularList
	name={"h"}
	data={["t", { val: 1, ant: "t" }, 4, 3, 5, { val: 2, ant: "p" }]}
/>

Once we have `p` properly position at the foot, we have `p->next` point to
the new node `t`.

Now here's a question: Should we have the head pointer `h` point to this
new node `t`? We could, but there isn't any reason to do so. The notions of
"first," "last," "head," and "foot" are purely abstractions to aid us in
thinking about circular linked lists. There is no "first" or "last" node in
a circular list. Accordingly, we refrain from changing the head pointer
because it's an unnecessary additional operation.

Implementing the procedure in pseudocode:

```rust
prepend(Node* head, int newData) -> void:
	Node* t = new Node();
	t->data = newData;
	t->next = head;
	Node* p = head;
	while (p->next != head):
		p = p->next;
	p->next = t;
	head = t;
```

### General Insertion

Now that we've covered the two cases, we can implement a more general
function for insertion. Note that the code does not include a guard against
invalid position values. When implementing the procedure above, it's
imperative that we provide a guard. If the user passed an index of say,
${-1,}$ we would enter an infinite loop, forever traversing the circular
list.

The time complexity for this procedure is no different from what we saw
earlier. In the best case scenario, we're inserting immediately after
`head`'s pointee. In the worst case scenario, we're inserting immediately
before `head`'s pointee. In the former we have a time complexity of
${O(1),}$ and in the latter we have a time complexity of ${O(n).}$

```rust
fn insert(int position, int newData) -> void:
	Node* t;
	Node* p;
	if (position == 0):
		t = new Node();
		t->data = newData;
		if (head == NULL):
			head = t;
			head->next = head;
		else:
			p = head;
			while (p -> next != head):
				p = p->next;
		p->next = t;
		t->next = head;
		head = t;
	else:
		p = head;
		for (int i = 0; i < position - 1; i++):
			p = p->next;
		t = new Node();
		t->data = x;
		t->next = p->next;
		p->next = t;
```

## Deleting Circular List Nodes

Alongside insertion, we next consider how to delete nodes in a circular
list. Like insertion, there are two cases of deletion:

1. Deleting the `head`'s pointee node, or
2. deleting a node at any other given position.

Suppose we had the linked list below, and we want to delete the node
containing `9`. Call it the _delete target_. To delete this node, we must
have a pointer to the node immediately before the delete target, and a
pointer to the delete target itself:

<CircularList
	data={[4, 3, { val: 7, ant: "t" }, { val: 9, ant: "d" }, 5, 8]}
/>

The pseudocode representation is presented below. Notice that this is
substantially the same as deleting from a linear linked list.

```rust
fn delete(int position) -> void:
	Node* t = head;
	Node* d;
	for (i = 0; i < position - 2; i++):
		t = t->next;
	d = t->next;
	t -> next = d->next;
	delete d;
```

Why is it `position - 2`? Because we start the pointer `t` at head (which
we're pretending has an index of `1`), and we want to stop it just before
the delete target. In this case, we're trying to delete the fourth node, so
`position = 4`. Thus, the for-loop's guard clause is `i < 4 - 2 = 2.` At
`i = 0`, the condition is satisfied, so we move `t` to the second node, and
increment `i`. At `i = 1`, the condition is again satisfied, so we move `t`
to the third node, and increment. At `i = 2`, the for-loop's guard clause
is not satisfied, so we break. This leaves `t` at the correct position.

Once we've position `t`, we initialize the second pointer, `d`, to `t`'s
next pointee. This places `d` on the fourth node, the delete target. Once
that is done, we assign as `t`'s next pointee the next pointee of `d`. In
this case, `t`'s next pointee becomes the fifth node. Then we free the
memory allocated for `d`'s pointee, the delete target.

### Deleting the Circular List's Head

What if we want to delete the head? Consider the following linked list:

<CircularList data={[1, 8, 3, 5, 2, 7]} />

To delete the head, colored green, we must perform the following: (1) the
node just after the head must become the new head, then (2) the foot's next
pointee must point to the new head.

This procedure is done by first moving a pointer `p` to the foot.

<CircularList data={[1, 8, 3, 5, 2, { val: 7, ant: "p" }]} />

Once there, we use `p` to change the foot's next pointee to the current
`head`'s next pointee:

<CircularList data={[{ val: 8, ant: 1 }, 3, 5, 2, { val: 7, ant: "p" }]} />

This effectively separates the current head from the circular list, while
still maintaining a link. As such, all that's left to do is to delete
`head` and make `p`'s next pointee, the former second node, as the `head`:

<CircularList data={[8, 3, 5, 2, 7]} />

The procedure in pseudocode:

```rust
fn deleteHead(Node* head) -> void:
	Node* p = head;
	while (p->next != head):
		p = p -> next;
	p->next = head->next;
	delete head;
	head = p->next;
```

### General Deletion

As we saw with insertion, we can implement deletion into a single general
function:

```rust
fn delete(Node* head, int position) -> void:
	Node* p;
	Node* q;
	if (position == 1):
		p = head;
		while (p->next != head):
			p = p->next;
		if (p == head):
			delete head;
			head = NULL;
		else:
			p->next = head->next;
			delete head;
			head = p->next;
	else:
		p = head;
		for (int i = 0; i < position - 2; i++):
			p = p->next;
		q = p->next;
		delete q;
```

The time complexity for deleting on a circular linked list depends on where
we're deleting. If we're deleting the second node—the node immediately
after the current head—then `position = 2`, and the steps executed are all
basic. This yields a time complexity of ${O(1).}$ For all other positions,
however, our time complexity is ${O(n).}$
