import { Digraph } from "@illus/Digraph";
import { Stack } from "@illus/Stack";

<Metadata
	title={"The Internet and ISPs"}
	description={"Notes on the internet structure and ISPs"}
	keywords={"computer networks, internet, ISPs"}
/>

# The Internet & ISPs

The Internet can be thought of as a roughly hierarchical structure.
Specifically, a hierarchical network of networks.

<Digraph
	data={[
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP x", "Tier 1 ISP y"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP y", "Tier 1 ISP x"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP x", "Tier 1 ISP z"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP z", "Tier 1 ISP x"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP y", "Tier 1 ISP z"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 1 ISP z", "Tier 1 ISP y"] },
		{ link: ["NAP", "Tier 1 ISP x"] },
		{ link: ["NAP", "Tier 1 ISP y"] },
		{ link: ["NAP", "Tier 1 ISP z"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 2 ISP x", "NAP"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 2 ISP y", "NAP"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 2 ISP z", "NAP"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 2 ISP x NAP", "Tier 2 ISP x"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 3 ISP", "Tier 2 ISP x NAP"] },
		{ link: ["Tier 3 ISP x NAP", "Tier 3 ISP"] },
		{ link: ["user1", "Tier 3 ISP x NAP"] },
		{ link: ["user2", "Tier 3 ISP x NAP"] },
		{ link: ["user3", "Tier 3 ISP x NAP"] },
	]}
	collisionRadius={50}
	dimensions={[550, 550]}
	scale={65}
/>

Each of the tier-1 ISPs above (companies like Sprint and AT&T) provide
national and international networks. These providers work together as
equals, providing some **network access point** (NAP). Tier-2 ISPs can then
connect to this NAP. The tier-2 ISPs provide access points of their own,
through which tier-3 ISPs can connect. And from the tier-3 ISPs, we, the
consumers, get internet access.

## The Internet Protocol Stack

One of the most remarkable aspects of the Internet is how stable's its
been. Despite the undoubtedly chaotic flow of innovation and change, the
Internet has not disintegrated. Among human innovations — whether that's
the steam engine, fiat currency, or the concept of government — this is
atypical. In fact, some human inventions eschew too much change. Some
people are engineers and worry about backwards compatibility, others are
federal judges who worry about what rich, old, white men thought in the
18th century.

So what separates the Internet from other human innovations? One answer is
_layering_ and _separation_. The argument is, although the Internet
undergoes rapid, and often drastic, changes, its layered structure keeps
those changes contained. In other words, developments "stay in their
lanes." This ensures that a change in one part of the structure doesn't
cause a breakdown of another part.

The layers consist of clean divisions:

<Stack
	data={["application", "transport", "network", "link", "physical"]}
	frameWidth={130}
	height={135}
	scale={40}
/>

Every technology the Internet comprises falls into one of these layers. The
application layer consists of technologies that support network
applications — FTP, SMTP, HTTP, HTTPS, DNS, and so on. PayPal and Amazon
Pay rely on HTTPs to ensure our transactions are safe. Domain hosting
services like GoDaddy and Google Domains rely on DNS services to sell users
their preferred website addresses. These services — YouTube, Netflix,
Spotify, etc. — work by following the application layer technology's
_protocols_; a set of rules governing how the technology and the service
interact.

If all goes well at the application layer, the application layer
technologies interact with the relevant _transport layer_ technology.
Technologies in the transport layer provide host-to-host data transfer
services. Like the application layer, these technologies also have
protocols: What information the application must provide, how that
information should be formatted, etc.

If the transport layer technology is satisfied, it then interacts with the
relevant _network layer_ technology. Technologies at this level provide the
routing of datagrams from source to destination: IP, BGP, a whole sleuth of
routing protocols — they all have the job of processing and executing
instructions for moving information.

If everything at the network layer goes well, the network technology
interacts with the _link layer_. These are the various network connections,
the "highways": PPP, ethernet, WiFi, Bluetooth, and so on. These
technologies are the actual paths that data moves along.

Finally, if things go smoothly at the link layer, the links interact with
the _physical layer_: The actual electrical pulses, or bits, on a wire. At
this level, we're closer to electrical engineering than computer science.
Technologies here include OFDM, DSSS, CDMA, and so on.
