<Metadata
	title={"Animations"}
	description={"Notes on animations in computer graphics"}
	keywords={"computer animation"}
/>

# Animations

Animating in ThreeJS &mdash; and JavaScript more generally &mdash; is
analogous to stop motion animations. The idea is that we move points
slightly, take a picture, move points again, take a picture, move points
again, take a picture, and so on. The act of &#8220;take a picture&#8221;
is rendering. Take many, many pictures and present them one at time very
quickly &mdash; we create the illusion of movement.

## Frame Rates

The speed at which the pictures are shown (or, in flipbookese, how fast we
flip through book), is called a **frame rate**, and it's usually measured
in the unit FPS (Frames Per Second). With higher frame rates,
&#8220;motion&#8221; appears smooth or fluid (think high-end video games
like _Diablo III_). With lower frame rates, motion appears choppy (think
some silly GIF).

Higher frame rates, however, do not imply better viewing experience. In
fact, the topic of an &#8220;ideal framerate&#8221; is subject to fiery
debate. Many of the movies and TV shows we see run at ${24 \text{ FPS}.}$
For cinematography, productions using frame rates beyond ${24 \text{ FPS}}$
tend to suffer from a phenomenon called the _soap opera effect_ (take a
look at clip from a product like _Days of our Lives_ &mdash; it has a
distinctive &#8220;look.&#8221;) Video games, at a minimum, generally run
on ${60 \text{ FPS}.}$

Furthermore, a viewing experience is also impacted by **frame time**
&mdash; how long a frame stays in view. We can have a frame rate of
${60 \text{ FPS},}$ but if frame times are inconsistent (e.g., one frame
lasts for ${2 \text{ mS}}$ and another ${5 \text{ mS},}$) we see phenomenon
called **stuttering** &mdash; small &#8220;pauses&#8221; or
&#8220;stills&#8221; in the motion.

The issue with frame rates and animations is that computers have different
frame rates. Many computers run on ${60 \text{ FPS,}}$ but more powerful
computers can run on ${120 \text{ FPS}.}$ Because of these variations, if
we animated a spinning propeller, the propeller might appear to spin much,
much faster on machines with higher frame rates. This is not what we want.
Our animations must look the same, regardless of the machine's frame rate.

Before we solve this problem, let's talk about how to animate to begin
with. The JavaScript API provides a method that allows us to take the
pictures we need:

- window.requestAnimationFrame(𝑓)

where 𝑓 is a _callback function_.

The procedure for animating is to pass object transformations into the
`requestAnimationFrame()` method, perform the renderings therein, then call
the `requestAnimationFrame()` in the next call. This is a little tricky to
think about, but we can clarify by thinking of the method's purpose: The
purpose of `requestAnimationFrame()` is to call a function provided in the
_next_ frame. To perform animations, we must always keep this fact in the
back of our minds. The method `requestAnimationFrame()`, despite its name,
is _not_ a function that performs animations; it's a function that calls
some function in the next frame just once.

For example, suppose we've instantiated all of our meshes and cameras, and
added them to the scene. To animate our mesh, we first need the callback
function:

```javascript
const tick = () => {
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

By writing the function above, we are telling JavaScript to call the `tick`
function on the next frame, then on that frame, call the `tick` function on
the next frame, and on the next frame, and so on.

Because the `tick()` function is constantly being called at different
times, we can pass our transformations and renderings into the `tick()`
function. Using some ThreeJS methods that update the transformations and
renderings, we effectively modify object properties many, many times:

```javascript
const tick = () => {
	// update object properties
	mesh.position.x += 0.01;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

The code above will display the mesh moving along the ${x}$-axis. If we
instead wrote:

```javascript
const tick = () => {
	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y += 0.01;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

We would see our mesh rotating about the ${y}$-axis. At this point, we now
run into our previous problem. On a machine with a higher frame rate, the
mesh would move or rotate much faster than a machine with a lower frame
rate. This is because the number of calls to the `tick()` equals the number
of frames per second. More frames per second &mdash; more calls to `tick()`
&mdash; more updates to the properties.

There are many ways to solve this problem. A common solution is to _adapt
to the framerate_. The idea behind this solution is to use a **timestamp**
of the current time, or date. Because the timestamp will be the same for
all users, regardless of frame rate, we can use the timestamp as a common
starting point for all viewers. With the timestamp, we compare the current
timestamp against the previous timestamp. Because both timestamps are
constant, the difference between the two timestamps is constant. We'll call
this difference `deltaTime`. Because `deltaTime` is constant, we can then
use it to establish uniformity across frame rates.

To initialize a timestamp, we use the native method `Date.now():`

```javascript
let previousTime = Date.now();
const tick = () => {
	// current time for frame
	const currentTime = Date.now();

	// elapsed time
	const deltaTime = currentTime - previousTime;

	// update the previous time for the next tick to use
	previousTime = currentTime;

	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y += 0.01;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

Because the `deltaTime` value is constant, multiplying that value with the
values for property updates creates uniformity across frame rates:

```javascript
let previousTime = Date.now();
const tick = () => {
	// current time for frame
	const currentTime = Date.now();

	// elapsed time
	const deltaTime = currentTime - previousTime;

	// update the previous time for the next tick to use
	previousTime = currentTime;

	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y += 0.01 * deltaTime;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

Another fix is to use ThreeJS's built-in solution, `Clock()`. The `Clock`
object provides a method called `getElapsedTime()`, which essentially
computes the `deltaTime` we saw earlier:

```javascript
const clock = new THREE.Clock();
const tick = () => {
	// elapsed time
	const deltaTime = clock.getElapsedTime();

	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y = deltaTime;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

Importantly, the `getElapsedTime()` method returns the elapsed time in
seconds. Because this is a number value that changes, we can assign this
number directly to `mesh.rotation.y`. If we want to perform 1 revolution
per second:

```javascript
const clock = new THREE.Clock();
const tick = () => {
	// elapsed time
	const deltaTime = clock.getElapsedTime();

	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y = deltaTime * Math.PI * 2;

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```

If we want animations that cycle through various movements, we rely on
trigonometry. We know that the functions ${y = \sin x,}$ ${y = \cos x,}$
${y = \tan x,}$ and their inverses are all cyclical functions. Accordingly,
we can use this fact to perform repetitive animations, like a mesh
oscillating up and down:

```javascript
const clock = new THREE.Clock();
const tick = () => {
	// elapsed time
	const deltaTime = clock.getElapsedTime();

	// update object properties
	mesh.rotation.y = Math.sin(elapsedTime);

	// render
	renderer.render(scene, camera);

	// call the tick function for the next frame
	window.requestAnimationFrame(tick);
};
tick();
```
