# Computer Graphics

This volume provides notes on computer graphics. To illustrate key
concepts, we use ThreeJS—a JavaScript library that enables developers to
create 3D visualizations and experiences for the web. We can think of it as
an abstraction of **WebGL** ("Web Graphics Library").[^lib1]

WebGL itself is a JavaScript API that renders triangles. Yes—impressive 3D
graphics in websites are done via triangles. These triangle renderings are
displayed in some HTML element (most commonly, a `canvas`). 3D effects
result from the fact that these triangles are rendered at breathtaking
speeds. These speeds are possible because WebGL uses the host machine's GPU
(Graphic Processing Unit). The advantage to using the GPU is because of
parallel computation. As we know, JavaScript is a single-threaded language.
And as a single-threaded language, the vast majority of computations—done
by the CPU—can only be done one a time. Those computations are fast, but
with graphics, visualizations are better rendered with parallel
computations—we want to render a gargantuan amount of triangles all at
once. For JavaScript, this is only feasible through the GPU.

[^lib1]:
    ThreeJS can also work with SVG and CSS, but because it's geared
    primarily at abstracting WebGL, SVG and CSS functionalities remain
    limited.

The idea behind rendering triangles is that we position three vertices, and
state that there are edges connecting them. These instructions are written
in **shaders**, a topic we will discuss in later sections, and are
forwarded to the GPU. The GPU then processes these instructions and
displays particular colors to the individual pixels bounded by the vertices
and edges.

This is a remarkably fast process. By manipulating the positions of various
vertices all at once—which in turn changes the colors of the individual
pixels all at once—we can create the effect of a 3D dimensional object. The
entities that perform these manipulations are specified functions.

A _camera_, for example, is one such function. By manipulating the vertices
in a particular way, we create the effect of seeing the 3D object from
different angles, when in reality, we're just changing the position values
for many vertices all at once.

A fair question we might have is why not just use WebGL directly then?
Indeed, we can. Many projects in _haute graphique_—very high-end graphics
work—are written directly in WebGL for better control. And with better
control, the programmer can optimize for performance as needed. The
tradeoff, however, is that WebGL is painfully difficult to write. Drawing a
single triangle on an HTML `canvas` element would take, at a minimum, a
hundred lines of code.
