# Properties of Real Numbers

> A Roman walks into a bar, holds up two fingers and says, "I'll have five
> beers."

Numbers have been around for a long time. Early humans used all sorts of
ways to record their enumerations: Scratches on cave walls and bones; knots
on strings; pebbles and shells; notches cut into twigs &mdash; all attempts
to quantify, to make sense of the environment. It's as if the numbers
revealed themselves magically.

But what is it really magic? Or was it purely out of necessity? The
intuitive response is that our ancestors needed to quantify objects.
Perhaps the earliest hunters needed to determine how much game was needed
for the village. Or the chief having to decide a fair tribute. But this
response neglects the fact that our forebears weren't just concerned with
survival. They were also deeply superstitious.

Some of the earliest forms of counting date to religious ceremonies and
mysticism. Many of these ceremonies required ordering participants and
events, hinting at the possibility that the ordinal numbers &mdash; numbers
used to denote position &mdash; came before the cardinal numbers &mdash;
numbers used for quantity.

Indeed, there's a plausible argument there. Some of the earliest forms of
the cardinal numbers were rudimentary and simple, in contrast to their
ordinal counterparts. Cardinal numbers were limited to ${2,}$ and anything
beyond that was a word for "many" or "lots." Moreover, the view that the
ordinals preceded the cardinals would be in line with the recurring
phenomenon of dividing the integers into "male" and "female," an idea that
would eventually lead to "odd" and "even."

Regardless of whether the ordinal or the cardinal came first, the human
need for numerating grew increasingly complex. And as complexity increased,
so too did our sophistication. Sticks, stones, and bones were too
ephemeral, so we developed number systems to more efficiently analyze our
states of affairs. As far back as 3600 BC, the Ancient Egyptians used a
numbering system where every ${10}$ unique characters could be abstracted,
or symbolized, by a new, unique character. The Egyptian system evidences
one of the earliest forms of a base-10 system, or decimal system. Unlike
the number system we're familiar with, the Ancient Egyptian number system
introduced a new symbol for every ${10}$ symbols. In other words, a symbol
for ${1,}$ then for every ten ${1s}$, a symbol for ${10,}$ then ${100,}$
then ${1,000,}$ then ${10,000,}$ then ${100,000,}$ and so on.

Centuries later, the Greeks concocted their own number system, where a
unique character for ${5}$ was introduced. The ancient Romans followed
suit, utilizing the familiar capital letter numerals now relegated to
formal headings and cryptic date tattoos. The numerals ${I,}$ ${II,}$ and
${III}$ are derived directly from using three fingers to symbolize ${3;}$
the numeral ${V}$ from the angle formed by all five fingers; and ${X}$ from
the joining of two ${V.}$ The numeral ${C}$ represented ${100,}$ and half
of a ${C}$ &mdash; an ${L}$ &mdash; represented ${50.}$ The numeral ${M}$
represented ${1,000.}$ Split it in half and turn it on its side, we obtain
something that looks like ${D,}$ the numeral for ${500.}$

The ancient Mayans too had a sophisticated and flourishing number system,
where dots and tallies were used as numerals. The beauty in the Mayan
system was its strong connection to addition. Numerals logically followed
from arithmetic. In contrast to the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, the
ancient Mayans introduced a new, unique character for every ${20}$ symbols,
an example of a base-20 system, or vigesimal system. Moreover, like the
ancient Egyptians, the Mayans understood the need to represent zero and
assigned it a unique symbol &mdash; well before zero was accepted in
Europe.

Ancient China, whose characters made their way into the Korean peninsula
and the Japanese isles, developed a number system from a mixture of
pictographs and arithmetic. Unlike the Mayans and their connection to
addition, the Chinese number system draws directly from multiplication and
addition. By incorporating two arithmetic operators, the Chinese number
system allowed for a smaller set of numerals, which in turn permitted
efficient enumeration of large quantities.

The numerals we use today are the Hindu-Arabic numerals, derived from Hindu
and Arabic number systems. Developed about ${2,000}$ years ago in India,
the numerals made their way into Europe, via the Spanish peninsula. The
Moors (Spanish Muslims), in their search for trade, brought both the
Hindu-Arabic numerals and Ancient Greek philosophy, preserved by Arabic
scholars. In the 12th century, Leonardo Fibonacci, for whom the Fibonacci
numbers are named, furthered the numerals spread into continental Europe.
By the 15th century, the Roman numerals &mdash; until then the predominant
symbols &mdash; were entirely replaced by the Hindu-Arabic numerals we know
today.

All of this is to say that there is a distinction between a numeral and a
number. The numeral is purely a symbol. We could have just as easily
continued using Roman symbols to do mathematics, just as medieval Europeans
did. Understanding this distinction is crucial for when we study numbers.
The Chinese symbol äº” is different from the Hindu-Arabic symbol ${5}$, but
they both communicate the same idea &mdash; the number five. Often, we'll
find that numerals are inappropriate for a particular analysis because of
the underlying idea they communicate &mdash; a discrete number. In those
situations, we must let go of the numeral abstraction, and think in
different terms, different symbols, and different relationships. To do so
effectively, we study the properties of the real numbers.
