# Truth Sets

Because expressions contain variables, an equation is true or false if, and
only if, we substitute values into those variables. Until then, an equation
is neither true nor false. If a value is inputted and the equation is true,
we call that value the solution, or root, of the equation. The set of all
roots to an equation is called the equation's truth set.

If an equation's truth set is the equation's domain, we say that equation
is an _identity_. For example, the equations:

- ${x^2 - 9 = (x - 3)(x + 3)}$
- ${\dfrac{4x^2}{x} = x}$

are identities. Both equations have a domain of $\mathbb{R}$, and
substituting $x$ with any real number will render the equations true.

## Open Sentences

Consider the following:

$$
	1 + x = 4
$$

The above is clearly an equation, but more broadly, it is called an **open
sentence** &mdash; a statement that contains a variable, and becomes a
proposition when an element of the universal set is substituted for the
variable. In this case, the universal set is the set of all real numbers,
${\R.}$ If we substitute ${1,}$ an element of the universal set, into the
variable, we obtain ${1 + 1 = 2,}$ a false proposition. But, if we instead
substituted 3, another element of the universal set, we obtain
${1 + 3 = 4,}$ a true proposition.

Like propostions, we denote open sentences with lower-case letters, with
the one key difference &mdash; there is a subscript appended, corresponding
to the variables used in the open sentence. For example, the open sentence
above might be denoted ${p_x.}$

The rule of substituting remains applicable for variables that occur more
than once in the sentence:

$$
	1 + x + x = 2
$$

To return a true proposition for the sentence above, we must substitute a
value into each ${x}$ in the open sentence.

We call these statements open sentences because they are in fact sentences.
Equations, at the end of the day, are simply sentences. The equation
${2x = 3}$ is just another way of saying, &#8220;Two multiplied by some
value is three.&#8221; The use of the symbols 2, ${x,}$ ${=,}$ and ${3,}$
and arranging those symbols in a particular way, is nothing more than a
means of making things more concise and easier to read. Mathematicians
invent and use symbols because certain propositions cannot be expressed
concisely and clearly in plain English:

$$
	\int_0^{3.8}\frac{\pi^4 x y (a+9 c+8 b \cos(\frac{\pi z}{l})+18 c \cos(\frac{2 \pi z}{l})) \sin^2(\frac{\pi z}{l})}{l^4} dz
$$

&#8220;The ingegral with respect to ${z}$ from 0 to 3.8 of the quotient of
the product of the product of the fourth power of Pi, ${x,}$ and ${y}$
multiplied by the sum of ${a,}$ the product of ${8,}$ ${b,}$ and the cosine
of the quotient of the product of Pi and ${z}$ divided by ${l,}$ the
product of ${18,}$ ${c,}$ and the cosine of the quotient of 2, Pi, and
${z,}$ and the square of the sine of the quotient of Pi and ${z}$ divided
by ${l,}$ all divided by the the fourth power of ${l.}$&#8221;
